.
GOOD EVENING AND WELCOME TO THE
TUESDAY OCTOBER 7TH TWENTY
TWENTY FIVE REGULAR MEETING
OF THE ANN ARBOR PLANNING
COMMISSION.
MY NAME IS DANIEL WHITE AND I
WILL BE CHAIRING TONIGHT'S
MEETING FOR DETAILED
INFORMATION ON MEETING
PROCEDURES.
PLEASE REVIEW THE FULL PRINTED
MEETING AGENDA PROVIDED AT EACH
END OF THE DYAS MANAGER.
KELLY, WOULD YOU PLEASE CALL
THE ROLE ABSOLUTELY.
>> NOTING THAT COMMISSIONER LEE
WAS EXPECTED TO BE ABSENT WITH
ADVANCE NOTICE WISCH HERE
APRON'S HERE HAMMERSCHMIDT HERE
DISH HERE MELS HERE WHETHER IT
BE HERE ADAMS NORTON HERE YOU
HAVE A QUORUM.
>> THANK YOU.
MAY I HAVE A MOTION TO APPROVE
THE AGENDA MOVED BY COUNCIL
MEMBER DISH SECONDED BY
COMMISSIONER ABRAMS ALL THOSE
IN FAVOR OF THE MOTION PLEASE
SAY I OPPOSE THE MOTION HARRIS
MAY I HAVE A MOTION TO APPROVE
THE MINUTES OF THE SEPTEMBER
16TH TWENTY TWENTY FIVE MEETING
MOVE BY COMMISSIONER DISH
SECONDED BY COMMISSIONER
WEATHERBEE.
IS THERE ANY DISCUSSION OF THE
MINUTES ALL THOSE IN FAVOR
OF THE MOTION PLEASE SAY I ANY
OPPOSE THE MOTION CARRIES.
NEXT UP ARE THE REPORTS TO THE
PLANNING COMMISSION AND WRITTEN
COMMUNICATION WE USUALLY START
WITH COUNCIL MEMBER DISH ARE
YOU READY?
>> A COUNCIL MEMBER DISH I AM
BECAUSE THERE MAY HAVE BEEN
THINGS ON THE CONSENT AGENDA
WHICH MAKES KELLY CAN REMIND US
OF BUT IN THE REGULAR BUSINESS
NOTHING PLANNING RELATED WAS
VOTED ON LAST NIGHT.
I DON'T HAVE ANY ADDITIONS TO
THE COUNCIL BUSINESS FOR THE
MANAGER REPORT TONIGHT.
I JUST WANTED TO CLARIFY SOME
ITEMS ABOUT TONIGHT'S AGENDA.
YOU CAN SEE A TIMELINE JUST A
REFRESHER THAT IS ON THE SCREEN
RIGHT NOW.
TONIGHT THE PLANNING COMMISSION
WILL DECIDE WHETHER TO FORWARD
THE THIRD COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
DRAFT TO CITY COUNCIL TO START
A MINIMUM SIXTY THREE DAY
REVIEW PERIOD.
THIS PERIOD WOULD NOTIFY PUBLIC
AGENCIES AND SURROUNDING
MUNICIPALITIES THAT WE ARE
ACCEPTING THEIR INPUT.
THAT'S ACCORDING TO THE STATE
STATUTE.
IF THE PLANNING COMMISSION
FORWARDS THE DRAFT, IT'S
SCHEDULED TO GO TO CITY COUNCIL
ON OCTOBER 20TH TO BE APPROVED.
THE PLAN WOULD HAVE TO GO
THROUGH THE MINIMUM REVIEW
PERIOD.
IT WOULD HAVE TO HAVE A PUBLIC
HEARING AND FINAL VOTE WITH THE
PLANNING COMMISSION AND THEN IT
WOULD HAVE A FINAL VOTE WITH
COUNCIL.
SO A FINAL VOTE ON THIS PLAN
WOULD NOT HAPPEN UNTIL UH, NO
EARLIER THAN FEBRUARY OR MARCH
OF NEXT YEAR.
SO JUST TO CLARIFY FOR THOSE
WHO MAY BE CURIOUS ABOUT WHAT
TONIGHT'S VOTE MEANS, IT WOULD
BE A RECOMMENDATION TO START
THAT STATE REQUIRED REVIEW
PERIOD TO A CITY COUNCIL DURING
THE REVIEW PERIOD.
PUBLIC COMMENT WOULD CONTINUE
TO BE RECEIVED AND THAT WOULD
BE THROUGH WHAT WE CALL THE HUB
YOU CAN FIND THIS AT ENGAGE
THAT TO GOVERN ORG AND WE WILL
HAVE INFORMATION WE HAVE
INFORMATION ABOUT THAT IN
TONIGHT'S PACKET LOOKING AT THE
POWERPOINT, THE SLIDE DECK AND
WE WILL ALSO HAVE A QR
CODE JUST FOR THE SAKE
OF CONVENIENCE ON THE SCREEN
LATER TONIGHT ANYTHING AND THAT
CONCLUDES THE MANAGER REPORT.
THANK YOU MANAGER KELLY DO
OTHER COMMISSIONER OFFICERS OR
COMMITTEE LIAISONS HAVE
ANYTHING TO REPORT YET?
COMMISSIONER HAMMERSCHMIDT,
THANK YOU.
OH I SEE MET GUYS HELPED ME.
WAS IT LAST WEEK WAS IT THE
WEEK BEFORE WE MET TWO WEEKS
AGO PRIMARILY DISCUSSED THE
SIGNAGE FOR PROJECTS THAT WERE
GOOD.
YEAH YOU KNOW WHAT I MEAN.
THE SIGNAGE THE SCIENTIFIC
AGREEMENTS THAT WE ARE TALKING
ABOUT PUTTING IN FRONT
OF PROJECTS SO PEOPLE KNOW THAT
THEY'RE COMING THEY KNOW HOW TO
GIVE FEEDBACK BEFORE IT COMES
TO US.
>> I THOUGHT YOU'D BE EXCITED
ABOUT A COMMISSIONER WHICH I
AM.
>> THANK YOU FOR YOUR REPORT.
ARE THERE ANY OTHER REPORTS
WRITTEN COMMUNICATIONS ARE IN
TODAY'S PACKET AND WITH THAT WE
MOVE TO PUBLIC COMMENT SO WE
HAVE A PUBLIC COMMENT PERIOD
THAT WILL BE AVAILABLE FOR
FOLKS TO ADDRESS THE PLANNING
COMMISSION FOR UP TO THREE
MINUTES.
I I THINK IT'S JUST WE ONLY
HAVE ONE THING LISTED ON THE
AGENDA TONIGHT SO I WON'T READ
THE SECOND PART AND SO THERE
ARE THREE INDICATORS ON THE
PODIUM THERE'S A GREEN LIGHT
THAT MEANS YOU'RE GOOD TO GO.
THERE'S A YELLOW LIGHT.
IT MEANS START TO WRAP UP AND
THEN THERE IS A RED LIGHT.
IT MEANS PLEASE STOP TALKING
AND ALLOW SOMEONE ELSE TO SPEAK
AND BECAUSE THERE ARE A LOT
OF YOU THAT ARE HERE TONIGHT
WE'D LOVE TO HEAR FROM ALL
OF YOU SO IT WOULD HELP US IF
EVERYONE WOULD RESPECT THE
INDICATORS AS WE HAVE THEM
HERE.
IF YOU HAVE ANY QUESTIONS YOU
CAN ASK THOSE QUESTIONS.
I WILL SEE IF I CAN MAKE AN
ANSWER.
BUT GENERALLY THE COMMISSION
JUST LISTENS TO YOUR PUBLIC
COMMENTS.
WE DO NOT RESPOND DIRECTLY
AFTER WE HAVE A PUBLIC COMMENT
PERIOD.
THERE IS A PERIOD IF
COMMISSIONERS WOULD LIKE TO
REPLY TO ANYTHING THAT THEY
HAVE HEARD.
ALL RIGHT.
I'M GOING TO DO SOMETHING
UNUSUAL I'M SORRY MANAGER
KELLY, BUT IS THERE ANY
QUESTIONS RIGHT NOW BEFORE WE
GET STARTED WITH ABOUT THE
PROCESS?
OK, GO HAD IT.
IT DEPENDS IF WE IF THERE'S AN
ANSWER TO BE HAD A COMMISSIONER
MAY PICK IT UP BECAUSE WE DO
WANT TO TRY TO MAKE SURE THAT
YOU GET THE INFORMATION THAT
YOU WANT.
>> THAT'S OUR GOAL.
WE WILL NOT DO DURING YOUR
PUBLIC COMMENT HOWEVER.
SO IF YOU ASK US A QUESTION
DURING YOUR PUBLIC COMMENT WE
WILL NOT REPLY.
WE'LL WRITE IT DOWN AND THEN
AFTER PUBLIC COMMENT THAT WILL
BE WHEN WE WOULD ADDRESS DOES
THAT MAKE SENSE?
OK, I'LL TAKE ONE MORE QUESTION
BEFORE MANAGER KELLY TURNS OFF
MY MICROPHONE.
ALL RIGHT.
WE ARE GLAD THAT YOU ARE HERE
AND WE ARE EAGER TO HEAR WHAT
YOU HAVE TO SAY.
LET ME READ THE SCRIPT.
>> WE WILL FIRST HEAR FROM
THOSE OF YOU WHO ARE PRESENT IN
THE CHAMBER.
THEN WE WILL HEAR FROM REMOTE
PARTICIPANTS TO SPEAK REMOTELY
PLUS STAR NINE IF ON PHONE OR
USE THE RACE HAND FEATURE IF
YOU ARE USING ZOOME FOR PHONE
ACCESS DIAL EIGHT SEVEN SEVEN
EIGHT FIVE THREE FIVE TWO TWO
EXCUSE ME FOR SEVEN AND INTER
MEETING ID NINE SEVEN SEVEN SIX
SIX THREE FOUR ONE TWO TWO SIX
CITY STAFF WILL IDENTIFY BY THE
LAST THREE DIGITS OF THEIR
PHONE NUMBER OR BY NAME IF
USING ZOOM YOU WILL HEAR AN
ANNOUNCEMENT WHEN IT'S YOUR
TURN TO SPEAK PLEASE MOVE TO A
QUIET AREA MUTE ANY BACKGROUND
NOISE FOR ALL PARTICIPANTS
WHETHER IN THE CHAMBERS OR
ONLINE.
PLEASE STATE YOUR NAME AND YOUR
ADDRESS AT THE BEGINNING
OF YOUR COMMENTS.
>> IS THERE ANYONE IN THE
CHAMBER WHO WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK
AT THIS TIME?
>> EXCELLENT.
KICK US OFF.
GOOD EVENING FOR THE KOOCHIE
WARD FIVE.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
I WANT TO SAY THAT I SUPPORT
THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
REVISIONS AND WANT TO EXPRESS
MY DEEP GRATITUDE TO YOU AND
EVERYONE ELSE WHO'S WORKED
DILIGENTLY AND AND CAREFULLY TO
IT FOR THIS DIVISION
SPECIFICALLY WITH RESPECT TO
THE MISSING MIDDLE AND
AFFORDABLE UNSUBSIDIZED
HOUSING.
I WOULD LIKE YOU TO I WOULD
LIKE YOU TO SEE ADIEUS AS AN
IMPORTANT SOLUTION AND EXPLORE
WAYS TO ADDRESS CHALLENGES
RELATED TO COST
AND FINANCING.
THUS IN THE IMPLEMENTATION
MATRIX FOR ONE POINT TWO
MISSING MIDDLE HOUSING I URGE
YOU TO ADD THIS ITEM WITHIN THE
NEXT ONE TO THREE YEARS.
EXPLORE A COMMUNITY ATTITUDE
DEVELOPMENT APPROACH THAT
BRINGS TOGETHER THREE OR MORE
HOMEOWNERS WITHIN A PARTICULAR
NEIGHBORHOOD SIMILAR TO THE
COMMUNITY SOLAR APPROACH TO FOR
EFFICIENT TO ENABLE EFFICIENT
AIDO DEVELOPMENT AND THIS COULD
INCLUDE WORKING WITH WITH AN
EMERGING NETWORK OF DEVELOPERS
AND CONTRACTORS AND ALSO MIGHT
INCLUDE A SET OF PRE-APPROVED
PLANS THAT ARE CONTEXTUAL TO
OUR NEIGHBORHOODS.
THOSE LAST ELEMENT ARE ALREADY
IN THE IMPLEMENTATION MATRIX
FOR ONE POINT FIVE COORDINATION
WITH LOCAL AND REGIONAL
PARTNERS.
I SUGGEST ADDING THIS FOLLOWING
ITEM AND THIS COULD TAKE LONGER
TIME SPAN TO DEVELOP WITHIN THE
NEXT THREE TO SIX YEARS.
I SUGGEST CONVENING LARGE
EMPLOYERS IN THE CITY TO SET UP
A JOINT AFFORDABLE HOUSING FUND
TO SUPPORT YOU ECOSYSTEM IN
WHICH OLDER HOUSE RICH
EMPLOYEES OR RETIREES OF THESE
EMPLOYERS CAN BE HELPED TO
DEVELOP ADA USE ALSO IN TANDEM
WITH THE OTHER ELEMENT IN THE
HOUSING SECTION OF THE
IMPLEMENTATION MATRIX THAT
INCLUDES, YOU KNOW, WORKING
WITH AN EMERGING NETWORK
OF DEVELOPERS AND CONTRACTORS
AND A SET OF PRE-APPROVED
PLANS.
I AM PERSONALLY AND
PROFESSIONALLY INTERESTED IN
THIS TYPE OF INFILL HOUSING BY
ENLISTING EXISTING HOMEOWNERS
TO HELP MEET THE HOUSING NEED
OF WORKERS THAT SERVE OUR
COMMUNITY AND I'M HAPPY TO BE
SERVE AS A RESOURCE IN THESE
EFFORTS.
>> THANK YOU FOR YOUR
ATTENTION.
THANK YOU.
ONE THING I NEGLECTED TO
INDICATE IS IF YOU CAN KEEP ANY
PRIVATE OR SIDE CONVERSATIONS
TO A MINIMUM WHILE IN THE
CHAMBER WE CAN ACTUALLY HEAR
THEM AND IT DISTRACTS US FROM
HEARING FROM THE PERSON WHO'S
AT THE PODIUM IF THEY ARE
DISTRACTING I WILL ASK THE
SPEAKER TO SUSPEND AND THEN I
WILL ASK YOU TO CEASE YOUR
CONVERSATION SO THAT WE CAN
GIVE OUR FULL ATTENTION TO
WHO'S AT THE PODIUM.
DOES THAT SEEM RIGHT FOR
EVERYBODY?
ARE YOU WILLING TO DO THAT?
OK, THAT ENSURES THAT WE CAN
HEAR FROM EVERYONE.
>> THANK YOU.
GOOD EVENING.
PLANNING COMMISSIONERS.
MY NAME IS GABE GROSSMAN.
I LIVE ON ELIZABETH STREET IN
WARD FOUR.
I'M HERE TONIGHT ON BEHALF
OF THE STUDENT HOUSING
COALITION, A PARTNERSHIP
BETWEEN THE ACLU, THE MICHIGAN
INSTITUTE FOR PROGRESSIVE
POLICY, COLLEGE DEMOCRATS, THE
INTER COOPERATIVE COUNCIL AND
THE PUBLIC INTEREST RESEARCH
GROUP.
LIKE MUCH OF AMERICA WE ARE
STRUGGLING WITH AFFORDABILITY.
THE HOMES WE LIVE IN RENT FROM
ANYWHERE FROM FIFTEEN THOUSAND
DOLLARS A YEAR FOR A SMALL
STUDIO TO HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS
OF DOLLARS FOR A HOUSE WHILE
TOO OFTEN BEING TREATED LIKE
SLUM'S LANDLORDS PACK IN AS
MANY STUDENTS AS THEY CAN AVOID
FAIR TAXES AND THEIR PROPERTIES
FALL APART.
NO WONDER STUDENTS ALSO TREAT
SLUMS DOWNTOWN.
THERE'S NO AFFORDABLE GROCERY
STORE.
THERE AREN'T ENOUGH PLACES TO
GATHER TO BUILD COMMUNITY TO
SIMPLY BE.
THAT'S JUST NOT UNFORTUNATE.
THAT'S NOT JUST UNFORTUNATE.
IT'S PREDICTABLE RESULT OF HOW
WE'VE CHOSEN TO USE OUR LAND SO
LITTLE OF IT IS SPENT ON WHAT
MAKES LIFE WORTH LIVING INSTEAD
ACRES UPON ACRES ARE PAVED OVER
FOR TRANSPORTATION, ROADS,
PARKING LOTS, DRIVEWAYS AND THE
SECOND BIGGEST IS WASTE IS FOR
THE MANDATED GRASSLANDS
SCATTERED, FENCED AND
FRAGMENTED TOO OFTEN DUE TOO
BROKEN UP TO OFFER REAL
COMMUNITY GREEN SPACE WHERE
PEOPLE CAN MEET, REST AND
RECONNECT WITH NATURE INSTEAD
OF HOMES WITH HOLDING SPACES
FOR CARS.
AND THAT'S WHY EVERY STUDENT
NEIGHBORHOOD HAS A CRATER, A
PARKING CRATER IN THE MIDDLE
OF IT AND WE ACT LIKE WE HAVE
NO CHOICE EVEN THOUGH ONE
HUNDRED YEARS AGO ANN ARBOR HAD
A FULL STREETCAR NETWORK
COMFORTABLY MOVING PEOPLE
WITHOUT MASSIVE GARAGES OR
ENDLESS PAVEMENT AND YET OUR
CURRENT COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
DOESN'T EVEN MENTION THAT IN
THE HISTORY AND ONLY MENTIONS
PUBLIC TRANSIT IN THE APPENDIX.
WE KNOW WE CAN BUILD BETTER
BECAUSE WE ALREADY HAVE LOOK AT
HARRY TOWNS HEAD AND COURTYARD
SURROUNDED BY LOCAL BUSINESSES
AND ROW HOMES.
>> IT'S BEAUTIFUL, IT'S BELOVED
AND UNDER TODAY'S ZONING IT'S
BANNED.
RIGHT NOW ONLY THE BIGGEST
DEVELOPERS CAN AFFORD TO BUILD
THROUGH THE RESTRICTIONS AND
THAT'S WHY WE GET SOME BIG BOXY
BUILDINGS INSTEAD BEAUTIFUL
MIDDLE MISSING MIDDLE HOUSING
AND GREEN SPACES THAT WE CAN
ENJOY.
THAT'S WHY I AM HERE TO SUPPORT
WHAT WE HAVE ALREADY DONE WITH
THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND TO
PUSH FORWARD IF WE WANT TO SEE
A CITY THAT SUSTAINS US, WE
NEED TO LEGALIZE IT.
WE NEED TO LEGALIZE BUILDING
ROOFS OVER PEOPLE'S HEADS.
WE NEED TO LEGALIZE COMMUNITY.
WE NEED TO LEGALIZE SHARE
PARKS, WALKABLE STREETS AND
PUBLIC TRANSIT THAT PEOPLE
ACTUALLY WANT TO RIDE.
THAT'S BECAUSE THE CITY WORKS
FOR PEOPLE ALL PEOPLE IT'S IT'S
NOT JUST POSSIBLE AND IT REALLY
IS WITHIN REACH.
WE ALL WE HAVE TO DO IS CHOOSE
IT.
THANK YOU.
HI.
MARY DURFEE TEN FIFTY TWO
OLIVIA THIRD WARD I'D LIKE TO
SPEAK TO THE SECTION ON
INFRASTRUCTURE SPECIFICALLY
PAGES NINETY AND NINETY ONE.
I HAVE EXPRESSED MY CONCERNS
ABOUT INFRASTRUCTURE TO ON
MULTIPLE OCCASIONS I'M AWARE
THAT LARGE CONSTRUCTION
PROJECTS SUCH AS HIGH RISES
AROUND SOUTH YOU MUST REPLACE
CURRENT INFRASTRUCTURE TO
INCREASE CAPACITY.
>> HOWEVER I AM CONCERNED ABOUT
MORE INCREMENTAL ISSUES ACROSS
THE CITY AT A THIRD WARD
COFFEE HOUR IN MARCH OF THIS
YEAR, MR. JORDAN ROBERTS
MENTIONED ONGOING EVALUATIONS
OF ANN ARBOR UNDERGROUND
UTILITIES.
I'M ASSUMING THAT THAT WORK IS
ONGOING AND THAT THE CITY IS
AWARE OF NEIGHBORHOODS IN WHICH
GROUNDWATER SEWER SYSTEMS ARE
AT OR NEAR CAPACITY.
GIVEN THAT I HAD HOPED THAT
MORE NEIGHBORHOOD CAPACITY
WOULD HAVE BEEN ADDRESSED IN
THE CURRENT DRAFT UPON
REVIEWING IT I WAS SOMEWHAT
DISAPPOINTED.
THERE IS A SENTENCE STATING
THAT THE FOLLOWING QUOTE ANY
IMPLEMENTATION OF THIS PLAN
MUST CAREFULLY ALIGN WITH
ANALYSIS AND PROJECTIONS
OF INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT
NEEDS AND COORDINATE ZONING
WITH CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT
PLANNING END QUOTE.
I WOULD LIKE HOWEVER TO FEEL
CONFIDENT THAT CAPACITY
OF NEIGHBORHOODS NOT JUST THE
CITY AT LARGE HAS BEEN
EVALUATED AND THAT THE ZONING
AND OR PERMITTING WILL NOT GET
AHEAD OF THAT CAPACITY.
FOR EXAMPLE, IF A GIVEN
NEIGHBORHOOD ARE SOURCES
STRIMMER WATER HAS THE CAPACITY
FOR USAGE BY 100 OR MORE
RESIDENTS.
I WOULD HOPE THAT ANY UP ZONING
ALLOWING SINGLE FAMILY HOMES TO
BE REPLACED BY LARGER
STRUCTURES THAT COULD HOUSE
MORE THAN ONE HUNDRED PEOPLE
WOULD NOT OCCUR WITHOUT
INCREASING THAT CAPACITY OR
UPGRADING THAT CAPACITY THAT IS
INFRASTRUCTURE SHOULD BE
IMPROVED BEFORE ZONING CHANGES
ARE MADE RATHER THAN WAITING
UNTIL AFTER SEWER SYSTEMS
OVERFLOW INTO RESIDENTS
BASEMENTS.
SPECIFIC LANGUAGE IN THE PLAN
STATING THAT UP ZONING WILL
WAIT UNTIL INFRASTRUCTURE IS
READY NOT JUST BY THE CITY BUT
BY SMALL NEIGHBORHOODS WOULD BE
REASSURING.
FINALLY THE MAP ON PAGE NINETY
ONE FOR SOME REASON FOCUSES ON
PLACEMENT OF RESILIENCE CENTERS
.
PERHAPS THIS IS WHERE RESIDENTS
GO WHEN THE SEWERS BACK UP IN
KEEPING WITH OTHER MAPS IN A
PLAN WHICH ARE ALL EXCELLENT IT
WOULD BE MORE INFORMATIVE IF
THIS MAP COULD INSTEAD SHOW THE
DEGREE OF ADDITIONAL
DENSIFICATION THAT THE ADDITION
THAT THE EXISTING
INFRASTRUCTURE CAN SUPPORT IN
EACH OF OUR NEIGHBORHOODS OR
AREAS FOR EXAMPLE 10 PERCENT
MORE, 50 PERCENT MORE WHAT CAN
BE ACCOMMODATED IN THAT
PARTICULAR AREA?
THIS WOULD GIVE US BETTER SENSE
AS TO WHAT PARTS OF THE CITY
ARE BEST SUITED OR BEST POISED
FOR DENSIFICATION AND WHETHER
PARTS OF THE CITY MOST DESIRED
TO BE DENSIFIED ARE READY.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
HELLO MY NAME IS ADAM
JUSZKIEWICZ AND I LIVE IN LAS
VEGAS DRIVE THE DICKEN
NEIGHBORHOOD OF THE FOURTH
WARD.
FIRST OFF, I'D LIKE TO THANK
DR. STRONGMEN FOR THE DELICIOUS
COOKIES AND ALL THE OTHER FOLKS
WHO BROUGHT SNACKS REALLY
BUILDS COMMUNITY WHEN WE CAN
COME TOGETHER AND SHARE FOOD
RATHER THAN OPTICS OF COZINESS
,I THINK IT CREATES AN
ATMOSPHERE OF COZINESS.
AND ISN'T THAT WHAT NEIGHBORS
ARE ALL ABOUT AFTER ALMOST
THREE YEARS OF HEALTHY, ROBUST
CIVIC PROCESS, EXTENSIVE AND
INCLUSIVE PUBLIC INPUT, THREE
DRAFTS AND QUITE A BIT OF DELAY
TO ACCOMMODATE EVEN MORE INPUT
,WE ARE FINALLY APPROACHING
THE HOMESTRETCH.
WELL, I AM SURE NONE OF US ARE
SEEING ABSOLUTELY EVERYTHING WE
WANT TO SEE IN THIS NEWEST
DRAFT.
I THINK IT IS TO BE EXPECTED
WHEN THERE ARE SO MANY
DIFFERENT OPINIONS IN THE ROOM
NONETHELESS, I BELIEVE YOU HAVE
DONE AN ADMIRABLE JOB
DISTILLING COUNCIL'S
PRIORITIES.
YOUR OWN OPINIONS AND THOSE
OF THE COMMUNITY INTO A VISION
FOR THE GROWTH OF ANN ARBOR
OVER THE NEXT TWENTY FIVE
YEARS.
IT'S GREAT TO SEE A PLAN
SUPPORTS ABUNDANT HOUSING,
STRIVES TO REPAIR SOME OF THE
PROBLEMS WITH MID 20TH CENTURY
SUBURBAN DEVELOPMENT PATTERNS,
ELIMINATES EXCLUSIONARY SINGLE
FAMILY ZONING AND AIMS TO
CREATE A VISION FOR AN
EQUITABLE SUSTAINABLE,
AFFORDABLE AND DYNAMIC ANN
ARBOR FOR ALL THIS DRAFT
SUPPORTS THOSE GOALS AND I
BELIEVE IT IS READY TO MOVE IT
ALONG TO CITY COUNCIL TO BEGIN
THE SIXTY THREE DAY REVIEW
PERIOD.
I WANT TO THANK ALL OF YOU THE
STAFF, THE CONSULTANTS AND THE
MEMBERS OF THE COMMUNITY WHO
HAVE COME TOGETHER TO PROVIDE
THEIR STORIES AND POSITIVE
VISIONS FOR THE FUTURE.
THIS WORK IS JUST STARTING AND
WE ALL NEED TO STAY INVOLVED
AND FOLLOW THROUGH AS WE MOVE
INTO IMPLEMENTATION.
THANK YOU FOR AFFORDING ME THE
TIME TO SPEAK TO YOU TONIGHT.
THANK YOU
.
KIM LINNIK 3RD WARD, ANN ARBOR.
I HAVE A LITTLE STORY TO TELL
WHICH MAY DISPLEASE SOME PEOPLE
OUR MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL, OUR
POLITICAL MACHINE THAT RECEIVED
SUBSTANTIAL CAMPAIGN SUPPORT
FROM FINANCIAL INTERESTS LYING
OUTSIDE THE CITY.
THESE INTERESTS THAT ADVOCATE
FOR AN EXTREME PRO-GROWTH
AGENDA IN THE CITY.
THIS CITY COUNCIL WITHOUT ANY
INPUT FROM THE PUBLIC PROPOSE A
MASSIVE REZONING INCLUDING THE
ELIMINATION OF ALL SINGLE
FAMILY ZONING TO ACHIEVE THAT
PRO-GROWTH AGENDA.
THE MAYOR WITH THE AGREEMENT
OF CITY COUNCIL HANDPICKED THE
PLANNING BOARD MEMBERS TO
EXECUTE THEIR AGENDA.
THE PLANNING COMMISSION
SUBSEQUENTLY HIRED A PLANNING
FIRM OUT OF COSTS APPROACHING
ONE MILLION DOLLARS IN TAXPAYER
MONEY TO DRAFT A NEW
COMPREHENSIVE LAND PLAN TO
GUIDE FUTURE DEVELOPMENT IN THE
CITY.
THE GOALS OF THIS PLAN WERE
DIRECTLY CONVEYED TO THIS FIRM
BY OUR ELECTED AND APPOINTED
CITY OFFICIALS WITH LITTLE TO
NO INPUT FROM THE RESIDENTS.
THE RESIDENTS OF THE CITY WERE
NEVER FULLY
INFORMED OF THESE
DEVELOPMENTS REQUEST THAT THE
RESIDENTS OF THE CITY BE
NOTIFIED BY A LETTER INCLUDED
WITH EITHER THEIR CITY OR WATER
CITY TAX BILL OR WATER BILL
WERE IGNORED INSTEAD OF VARIETY
PUBLIC MEETINGS WERE HELD THAT
DREW ONLY A FRACTION OF THE
CITY'S RESIDENTS.
THE INITIAL JUSTIFICATION
PROFFERED BY OUR ELECTED
OFFICIALS IN SUPPORT OF A
MASSIVE REZONING OF THE CITY
WAS TO MAKE ANN ARBOR MORE
AFFORDABLE EVEN THOUGH MANY
HIGH RISES IN OTHER BUILDINGS
HAVE SINCE POPPED UP IN THE
CITY, THE PRICE TO PURCHASE A
HOME OR RENT AN APARTMENT HAS
ONLY INCREASED.
GENTRIFICATION HAS OCCURRED ON
A GRAND SCALE.
SOME CITY OFFICIALS NOW ADMIT
THAT THE PROPOSED ZONING
CHANGES MAY NOT BRING THE PRICE
OF HOUSING DOWN BUT MAY ONLY
SLOW THE COST INCREASES NOW HOW
COMMITTED THE CITY TO
AFFORDABLE HOUSING?
APPARENTLY NOT VERY MUCH CITY
OWNED PROPERTY THAT WAS
SUPPOSED TO BE DEVELOPED FOR
THIS PURPOSE IS NOW OFFERED TO
DEVELOPERS FOR MARKET RATE
HOUSING.
SOME FUNDS OF THE KNOWLEDGE
THAT VOTERS PASS FOR AFFORDABLE
HOUSING HAVE BEEN DIVERTED TO
OTHER CITY USES SUCH AS A NEW
ELECTION CENTER.
ONE OF OUR CITY COUNCIL MEMBERS
AND I BELIEVE A MEMBER OF THE
PLANNING BOARD, LISA DISH LIED
ON RECORD ABOUT THE DETAILS
OF THIS TRANSACTION AND YOU CAN
WATCH THE VIDEO IF YOU DON'T
BELIEVE ME ATTEMPTS TO CURB
AIRBNB BS IN THE CITY WHICH
TAKE AWAY FROM PERMANENT
HOUSING FROM RESIDENTS HAVE
BEEN WATERED DOWN.
THE CITY HAS ALSO MADE
CONCESSIONS TO A TWICE
CONVICTED FELON FOR FINANCIAL
CRIMES WITH THREE DIFFERENT
NAMES TO DEVELOP ON AFFORDABLE
HOUSING UNITS.
FURTHERMORE, ONE OF THESE
DEVELOPMENTS HAS RESULTED IN
DESTRUCTION OF ABOUT TEN OLDER
HOMES TO BE REPLACED BY MORE
EXPENSIVE UNITS.
I ASSUME THAT THE DEMOLISHED
REMNANTS OF THESE HOMES WILL
END UP IN SOME LANDFILL.
OBVIOUSLY A MUCH TALKED ABOUT
SUSTAINABILITY THAT OUR CITY
OFFICIALS TOUT IS NOT A KEY
ISSUE FOR THEM EITHER.
UNFORTUNATELY THE RESIDENTS
OF ANN ARBOR ARE BY LAW ARE
LARGELY UNINFORMED AND IN MANY
CASES UNINTERESTED IN OUR CITY
GOVERNMENT.
WE HAVE AN ELECTED LEADERSHIP
THAT HAS LIED AND GAS LET US
BEHAVED UNETHICALLY AND DONE
ITS BEST TO MISLEAD THE PUBLIC
WITH THEIR PERFORMANCE
OF PROGRESSIVE AGENDA.
UNFORTUNATELY THEIR AGENDA IS
NOT PROGRESSIVE AT ALL.
I'M EXTREMELY DISAPPOINTED AND
YOU THE ELECTORATE SHOULD BE TO
THE PROCESS IS IMPORTANT.
WE CAN DEBATE POLICY BUT THIS
PROCESS IS HIGHLY IN THE CITY.
THANK YOU
.
GOOD EVENING.
MY NAME IS JEFF CROCKETT AND I
LIVE AT FIVE OR SIX EAST
KINGSLEE.
I WOULD LIKE TO THANKS SUSAN
KAUFMAN AND DAN RUBENSTEIN FOR
AN EMAIL THEY SENT TO YOU
OUTLINING THE MANY BENEFITS
OF HISTORIC PRESERVATION AND I
QUOTE PEER CITIES ARE CENTERING
HISTORIC DISTRICTS IN THEIR
LAND USE PLAN RECOGNIZING THAT
THEY GIVE CITIES NOT ONLY
SIGNIFICANT ECONOMIC BENEFITS
BUT ALSO A SENSE OF PLACE AND
UNIQUE IDENTITY GRAND RAPIDS,
KALAMAZOO, MADISON, PORTLAND,
BOULDER AND MINNEAPOLIS EMBRACE
HISTORIC DISTRICTS AS WELL AS
HISTORIC PROPERTIES AND
NEIGHBORHOODS.
INTERESTINGLY, NONE OF THESE
BENEFITS IS INCLUDED IN THE
CURRENT VERSION OF THIS CLUB.
I WONDER WHY ACCORDING TO A
STATEMENT FROM THE MINNEAPOLIS
CLUB, IT IS CRITICAL FOR PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT TO INCLUDE ALL
INTERESTED GROUPS IN THE
PRESERVATION PROCESS ESPECIALLY
THOSE WHOSE HISTORY HAS BEEN
MARGINALIZED AND WHOSE PLACES
SUFFER DELIBERATE DISINVESTMENT
AND REMOVAL.
MINNEAPOLIS WILL WORK TO ENSURE
THAT RESIDENTS OF ALL CULTURAL
CULTURES AND BACKGROUNDS WILL
HAVE ACCESS TO PRESERVATION
RESOURCES WHILE EXPERIENCING
THE ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, CULTURAL
AND EMOTIONAL BENEFITS
PRESERVATION THE CITY WILL USE
THE FEEDBACK FROM THIS
ENGAGEMENT TO HELP IDENTIFY AND
PRESERVE BUILDINGS, LANDSCAPES
AND OTHER PLACES IMPORTANT TO
THE CITY'S HERITAGE.
ADDITIONALLY, THE CITY WILL
RECOGNIZE AND ACTIVELY PROMOTE
THE INTRINSIC VALUE OF HISTORIC
PLACES AS INTEGRAL TO THE
CITY'S EVOLVING ENVIRONMENT.
PLEASE INCLUDE THE STATEMENT
AND THE HISTORIC PRESERVATION
STATEMENT ON PAGE SIXTY.
YOU NEED TO BE AWARE THAT HOMES
AND THE ONCE HISTORICALLY BLACK
NEIGHBORHOODS NORTH NORTH FORTH
NORTH FIFTH NORTH OF EAST
KINGSLEE ARE PARTICULARLY AT
RISK DUE TO THE PROJECTED
TRANSITION DISTRICT AND IN THIS
AREA I HAVE NO IDEA WHY THIS
DISTRICT IS INCLUDED.
PLEASE EXPLAIN ONE WAY TO
PROTECT THESE HOMES WOULD BE TO
CREATE AN HISTORIC DISTRICT FOR
THIS AREA BUT AT THE VERY LEAST
WE SHOULD BE DOCUMENTING THE
HISTORY OF THESE HOMES AND
STRIVE TO SAVE THEM FROM
DEMOLITION THAT WOULD BE A
DEMONSTRATION OF THE EQUITY YOU
HOPE TO ACHIEVE WITH THIS
COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE PLAN.
THANK YOU FOR CONSIDERATION FOR
THAT.
BUT IN CLOSING I WOULD LIKE TO
SAY I'M VERY DISTURBED ABOUT
THE PROVISION OF FOOD.
I SENT YOU AN EMAIL ABOUT THIS
AND IT'S BY ONE OF THE
POLITICAL FACTIONS IN THIS
GROUP FOR YOU TO ACCEPT THIS
FOOD IS A PROBLEM AND I'M NOT
SURE THE LEGALITY OF IT.
I ASKED THE CITY ATTORNEY TO
MAKE AN OPINION ON IT.
IT'S THE OPTICS THAT DOESN'T
THIS TERRIBLE AND WHAT WOULD
HAPPEN IF TWO OR THREE GROUPS
CAME AND FILLED THIS WITH FOOD?
HOW WOULD YOU DEAL WITH THAT?
WOULD YOU SAY YES TO ONE GROUP
A NO TO ANOTHER?
THE SOLUTION THE SOLUTION IS TO
CREATE A POLICY THAT OUTLINES
EXACTLY WHAT IS APPROPRIATE IN
TERMS OF PROVIDING FOOD.
I'M NOT SAYING YOU CAN'T HAVE
FOOD.
I'M SAYING CREATE A FAIR POLICY
SO THAT EVERYONE KNOWS IT'S
EQUITABLE.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
THANK YOU
.
EVENING MY NAME IS MARTY
HURWITZ.
I LIVE ON CAMBRIDGE ROAD.
OUR NEIGHBORHOOD IS ONE OF THE
MOST DENSELY POPULATED
NEIGHBORHOODS IN THE CITY AND
HAS BEEN TARGETED FOR GREATER
DENSITY BECAUSE OF PROXIMITY TO
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN.
WE HAVE FRATERNITIES AND
SORORITIES CO-OP CONDOMINIUMS,
ROOMING HOUSES, DUPLEXES,
MULTIPLEX'S AND APARTMENT
BUILDINGS ALL WITHIN TWO BLOCKS
OF MY HOME.
MAJORITY OF OUR NEIGHBORS ARE
UNDERGRADUATE STUDENTS.
WE KNOW WHAT IS LIKELY TO
HAPPEN WITH THE PLAN TO OUR
NEIGHBORHOOD HOUSE ON LINCOLN
ABOUT A HALF A BLOCK FROM MY
HOME WAS DEMOLISHED AND
REPLACED WITH TWO HOUSE LIKE
STRUCTURES THAT LOOK LIKE THEY
WERE DESIGNED BY A FOURTH
GRADER.
THE STRUCTURES PACKED ARE
PACKED WITH STUDENTS THE
STUDENTS HAVE THEIR OWN
BATHROOMS.
IT'S ALWAYS TRASH ON THE FRONT
PORCHES AND THERE'S NO
LANDSCAPING.
THIS IS NOT IN ANY WAY IN
CONTEXT WITH THE NEIGHBORHOOD
IN AND AROUND OUR NEIGHBORHOOD.
SPECULATORS AND DEVELOPERS HAVE
HAD FIELD DAYS WITH LUXURY HIGH
RISES AND LARGE BOXES RESULTING
IN THE LOSS LOSS OF AFFORDABLE
HOUSING AND LOSS OF SMALL
BUSINESSES.
NONE OF THIS HOUSING FOR
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN STUDENTS
OR EVEN NONSTUDENTS MARKET RATE
HOUSING IS SQUEEZED INTO
NEIGHBORHOODS WOULD BE
CONSIDERED AFFORDABLE FOR MOST
PEOPLE WHO WANT TO MOVE TO ANN
ARBOR TO AVOID A COMMUTE TO
WORK IN THE CITY.
WHY WOULD ANYBODY BELIEVE THAT
A DENSE ANN ARBOR WOULD BE MORE
DESIRABLE THAN HOUSING IN THE
TOWNSHIPS AND NEARBY TOWNS WITH
LOWER COST OF LIVING AND BETTER
PUBLIC SCHOOLS EVEN CONSIDERING
THE COMMUTE TO WORK?
I DON'T DENY THAT WE HAVE A
HOUSING CRISIS
OF AFFORDABILITY.
I AM GLAD THAT THE CITY HAS
MOVED WITH DUNBAR TOWER ON
SCHEDULE.
APPARENTLY IT APPEARS THAT MY
TAX MONEY IS GOING TO WHERE
IT'S SUPPOSED TO GO AND I'M
PLEASED ABOUT THAT.
BUT THERE IS A SECOND CRISIS
THAT HAS BEEN CREATED BY THIS
TOP DOWN PROCESS
OF COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND ITS
ROLL OUT.
THE MAYOR HAS IDEAS
OF MANHATTAN, ANALYZATION
OF THE CITY AND DENSIFICATION
WITHOUT ANY JUSFICATION THERE
HASN'T BEEN ANY ADEQUATE
INVOLVEMENT OF ALL STAKEHOLDERS
AND RESIDENTS IN THE CITY IN
THE PLANNING PROCESS.
MANY PEOPLE SPOKE TO THE
PLANNING COMMISSION AND WROTE
TO THE COMMISSION BUT THEIR
COMMENTS AND SUGGESTIONS TO
SEEM TO HAVE BEEN IGNORED AS
THEY DO NOT APPEAR IN THE THIRD
DRAFT OF THE PLAN.
THE PROCESS AND ROLL OUT OF THE
PLAN HAS CREATED A GROWING
CRISIS OF TRUST.
THE PLAN HAS AS WRITTEN DOES
NOT ALLAY THE LACK OF TRUST
THAT MANY ANN ARBOR CITIZENS
HAVE IN OUR CITY GOVERNMENT AND
IN THIS PROCESS THIS IS GOING
TO HAVE TO BE WORKED ON AN
AWFUL LOT BETTER.
IF ANYONE WANTS TO HAVE A
COMMUNITY BUY IN FOR THIS
PROJECT THANK YOU
.
GOOD EVENING.
RALPH MCKIE FIFTH WARD.
I OPPOSE APPROVAL OF THE PLAN
AND WROTE AN EMAIL WHICH I'LL
SUMMARIZE NOW THE PLAN
EXPRESSES LOFTY GOALS BUT IT
WON'T ACHIEVE ITS KNOWING
DECEPTION AIMED AT PEOPLE WHO
DESPERATELY WANT TO BELIEVE AND
GIVEN OTHER RECENT MOVES MOVING
FIVE MILLION OF AFFORDABLE
HOUSING DOLLARS TO THE GENERAL
FUND SALES OF THE CLEAN WITHOUT
COMMITTING THE SALE PROCEEDS TO
AFFORDABLE HOUSING BLOCKING THE
LAND TRUST PROGRAM FOR
AFFORDABLE HOUSING THAT'S THE
EPITOME EPITOME OF HYPOCRISY
AFFORDABILITY.
YOU'VE ACKNOWLEDGED THAT AT
BEST THAT GENTRIFICATION
PROMOTED BY THE PLAN WILL
MERELY SLOW PRICE INCREASES.
YET YOU AND THE NEIGHBORS FROM
YOUR NEIGHBORS LED BY KIRK
WESTFALL HERE CONSTANTLY TOUT
AFFORDABILITY.
YOU'VE CONVINCED MANY THE PLAN
WILL HELP THEM BUT IT WON'T.
WHY WE HAVE VERY LITTLE VACANT
LAND.
THE COST OF EXISTING HOUSING
AND CONSTRUCTION IS REPLACEMENT
WITH DENSER HOUSING WILL JUST
RESULT IN EXPENSIVE UNITS.
YOU'RE TALKING POINTS MIGHT BE
TRUE BUT NOT STILL NOT APPLY
HERE.
A SEATTLE STUDY SHOWS SPREADING
LAND COSTS ACROSS MORE UNITS IS
CHEAPER.
IT IS AND REPLACING HOUSES
THERE WITH QUAD PLEXUS RESULTED
IN UNITS PRICE THE SAME AS THE
HOUSES.
BUT LISTEN TO THE AUTHORS
PODCAST.
YOU'LL FIND OUT THAT APPLYING
THE MATH FROM THAT STUDY TO
HERE WOULD MEAN TRIPLICATES
UNITS SELLING AT SEVEN HUNDRED
THOUSAND DOLLARS TO REPLACE THE
FOUR TO ONE HUNDRED THOUSAND
HOUSE THAT WILL HURT, NOT HELP.
AND AS TO SUSTAINABILITY,
NOTHING IN THE PLAN DEALS WITH
THE MASSIVE CARBON RELEASED BY
DEMOLITION AND BUILDING NO
COMPARISON WITH THE
CARBON SAVED BY GETTING
COMMUTERS OFF THE
ROAD.
YET THE LATTER IS TOUTED AS THE
REASON TO DENSIFY HOW MANY
COMMUTERS WOULD DENSIFICATION
GET OFF THE ROAD?
VERY FEW COMMUTERS CAN AFFORD
SEVEN HUNDRED THOUSAND DOLLARS
OR TWO THOUSAND TOLERANCE
OF THOSE WHAT PERCENTAGE WOULD
PREFER TO LIVE OUTSIDE THE
CITY?
YOU SPENT A MILLION DOLLARS AND
TWO YEARS ON THIS PLAN WITHOUT
ANY REAL ANALYSIS OF ANY
OF THOSE FACTORS AND THE
BLOCKING OF THE PLAN TO BUILD
AFFORDABLE HOUSING BY THE LAND
TRUST IN THE COMMENTS THAT IT
CHANGES IN THE REGS NEED TO
WAIT UNTIL THE PLAN IS ADOPTED
AS BEAUTIFUL, BRUTAL
HYPOCRITICAL GIVEN THE CONSTANT
BENDING THE RULES FOR BIG
DEVELOPMENTS.
AND WHERE IS THE ANGST RAISED
SELLING THE KLEINWORT FOR 17
MILLION DOLLARS WITH NO
PROVISION WHATSOEVER TO USE THE
MONEY FOR AFFORDABLE AFFORDABLE
HOUSING NOT A PEEP AND AND
WHERE IS THE INCONSISTENCY
WASN'T EVEN MENTIONED AT
COUNCIL.
THE CLINES LAW WAS WAS
PRIORITIZED BY THE FORMER
COUNCIL.
THOSE THAT MANY OF YOU CALL THE
ANTI'S AND THE PARTY OF NO FOR
AFFORDABLE HOUSING THAT WAS
REITERATED BY HUNDREDS
OF PEOPLE HERE DURING THE ESSI
DEBACLE.
NOW AFFORDABLE HOUSING
LIPSERVICE ONLY HYPOCRISY.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
NOT THE LEAST.
I'M NOT SURE WE CAN DO THAT.
WE CAN ASK IS THAT THE SPEAKER
SPEAK INTO THE MICROPHONE.
UNFORTUNATELY THE PODIUM CAN
RAISE AND LOWER AS WELL IF
THAT'S NEEDED.
I THINK THERE IT GOES
.
HI I'M BILL HANNAH.
PARDON DRIVE WARD TO I'D LIKE
TO ACKNOWLEDGE THAT I CAN SEE
THIS PLAN TOOK A LOT OF WORK
AND I DON'T WANT TO MINIMIZE
THAT AND ALL THE WORK THAT WAS
DONE WITH THAT KIND OF THING
OUT THERE I HAVE TO SAY I FOUND
PROBLEMS WITH THE PLAN AND ALSO
APOLOGIZE FOR MY TONE SINCE THE
LAST PARTY LIKE THIS I SPOKE TO
WAS THE ANN ARBOR BOARD
OF EDUCATION.
THERE ARE NUMEROUS THINGS IN
THE PLAN THAT CONFUSE ME.
DO YOU SAY YOU'RE ELIMINATING
FIVE OF PREVIOUS PLANS NATURAL
FEATURES LAND USE DOWNTOWN
WHERE THESE SEEM LIKE THEY'RE
SEPARATE ENOUGH THAT THEY WOULD
BE BETTER DONE AS A SEPARATE
PLAN LIKE SAY DOWNTOWN BECAUSE
THE PROBLEMS DOWNTOWN ARE GOING
TO BE DIFFERENT THAN SAY WHERE
I LIVE IN THE NORTHEAST CORNER
THAT DOESN'T SEEM QUITE RIGHT
TO USE I GUESS THE GREATEST
FEAR FOR PEOPLE IN MY
NEIGHBORHOOD I THINK COME
STRAIGHT OUT OF THE LAND USE
PLAN OF 2009 IS ON PAGE SIXTY
ONE.
THERE'S A SECTION CALLED OUT
OF SCALE CONSTRUCTION AND I
THINK THIS IF I SUMMARIZE
INITIALLY WORRIES PEOPLE THE
MOST IS THAT THEIR SINGLE
FAMILY HOME IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
WILL SUDDENLY SEE FIVE FOR 10
STORY BUILDING BEING BUILT ON
THE EDGE BECAUSE THERE IS A
ALREADY A BUSINESS PARK OR
SOMETHING THAT HAS BEEN ZONED
AND CAN GO UP A LOT HIGHER.
AND I THINK THIS IS A BIG
CONCERN AND I FIND IT
INTERESTING THAT THIS WAS EVEN
MENTIONED IN THE LAND USE PLAN
OF 2009 YET IT SEEMS TO BE
SOMETHING THAT ONE HAS TO JUST
ACCEPT WITH YOUR PLAN YOUR
CURRENT PLAN.
AGAIN, I'M GOING TO STEAL WORDS
FROM A PREVIOUS SPEAKER CRISIS
OF TRUST AS FAR AS THE PLAN
THAT SAY ON PAGE THIRTY THREE
THE FOOTNOTE ON A SURVEY THAT'S
GIVEN THERE THE RESULTS OF IT
NULLIFY THE SURVEY SAYING THAT
IT'S NOT STATISTICALLY VALID
AND IS ONLY FOR REFERENCE.
YOU HAVE A HOME PRICE YOU USE
THE AMERICAN ASSOCIATION
OF REALTORS FOR THE PRICE.
I'M SURE THEY PROBABLY LIKE THE
PRICE HIGHER THAN SOME OTHER
ONE THAT'S ACTUALLY LOOKED AT
THE PRICES BECAUSE I'M RUNNING
OUT OF TIME.
BUT THAT I THINK IS THE
GREATEST PART AS FAR AS THERE'S
THIS MISTRUST BECAUSE AS YOU
WALK THROUGH THE PLAN YOU COME
ACROSS NUMBERS THAT THEY DON'T
QUITE MAKE SENSE OR IF YOU LOOK
THEM UP YOURSELF THEY DON'T
JIVE AND THAT'S WHERE YOU'RE
SEEING THIS PUSHBACK.
I'M ALL FOR A PLAN.
I THINK IT'S EXCELLENT THAT
YOU'RE LOOKING AT THE FUTURE
AND YOU GROW ANN ARBOR IN A
POSITIVE WAY.
BUT THE PROBLEM IS IF THE PLAN
LEADS TO NEGATIVE OUTCOMES,
THEY'RE GOING TO HAPPEN FAST
AND THEY'RE GOING TO BE HARD TO
UNDO.
THANK THANK YOU
.
HELLO.
HI.
MY NAME IS OUT OF THE HOUSE
HONEY.
I LIVE IN WARD TWO AND I AM ANN
ARBOR NATIVE.
I GREW UP HERE.
I LOVE THIS CITY.
I WANT TO STAY HERE THE REST
OF MY LIFE.
I FOUGHT THROUGH COVID TRYING
TO FIGURE OUT HOW WE'RE GOING
TO HANDLE OUR OWN HOUSING
CRISIS RIGHT.
OUR RENTS WENT UP ABOUT 50
PERCENT THEN WE STARTED GETTING
TO BIDDING WARS TO GO BUY A
HOUSE.
WE GOT OUTBID BY SOMEONE BY ONE
HUNDRED FORTY THOUSAND DOLLARS
ALL RIGHT.
THAT THAT'S IN SURPLUS OF THE
HOUSE THAT WE PUT IN OFFERING.
SO WHY WHY AM I HERE?
RIGHT.
BECAUSE I THINK THIS PLAN IS A
GIFT TO REAL ESTATE DEVELOPERS.
I THINK I EMPATHIZE WITH ANYONE
HERE WHO IS NEIGHBORS FOR
NEIGHBORS.
I AM ON YOUR SIDE TO HAVE
AFFORDABLE HOUSING.
THE FIGHT IS NOT YOU VERSUS ME.
IT'S US VERSUS LANDLORDS
BECAUSE AT THE END OF THE DAY
IF YOU BUY MY HOUSE YOU'VE
REMOVED ONE MORE SINGLE FAMILY
HOME AND LET ME EXPLAIN WHY
IT'S RELEVANT.
NEW HOUSING IN THE NORTHEAST
CORRIDOR GOES FOR ABOUT SEVEN
HUNDRED THOUSAND DOLLARS TODAY
MY HOUSE COST FIVE HUNDRED
THOUSAND.
I'M LUCKY WE HAVE TWO INCOMES.
OK, YOU BUY MY HOUSE, BULLDOZE
IT.
THAT IS NOW SIX HUNDRED SEVEN
HUNDRED THOUSAND DOLLARS IN
COST TO BUY DEMOLISH IT INTO A
BIDDING WAR I PUT UP A NEW
BUILDING STANDARD MARGIN
CONSTRUCTION IS 40 PERCENT NOW
I'M LOOKING AT NEW HOUSING FOR
A TRIPLEX BEING MAYBE EIGHT
HUNDRED A UNIT INSTEAD OF SEVEN
HUNDRED THOUSAND.
FURTHERMORE YOU JUST DROVE UP
THE VALUE OF THE HOUSES AROUND
ME BECAUSE YOU BOUGHT MINE.
THERE WAS A REDUCED SUPPLY
OF SINGLE FAMILY HOUSING IF YOU
DO THIS MY CONCERNS ARE SIMPLE
WHERE ARE THE CONSTRAINTS
AGAINST INVESTMENTS?
THIS PLAN DOES NOTHING TO STOP
SOMEONE WHO IS A BILLIONAIRE
FROM BUYING HALF A TOWN LIKE
JIM AFRICANUS DRIVING UP THE
RENTS SQUISHING SMALLER PEOPLE
OUT.
I DON'T WANT THAT.
I WANT THIS BEAUTIFUL CITY TO
THRIVE.
I WANT EVERYONE IN HERE TO BE
ABLE TO AFFORD A HOUSE I DON'T
WANT TO SELL OUT TO SOME RANDOM
RICH PERSON GOING IN, OWNING
HALF THE TOWN, COLLABORATING
AMONG EACH OTHERS PRICE FIXING
THE RENT WHICH HAPPENED TO ME
WHAT I CALLED MY LANDLORD AND
SAID WELL ACROSS TOWN THEY WENT
THE TWENTY ONE HUNDRED SO YOU
JUMP FROM FOURTEEN HUNDRED TO
FIFTY THAT'S SCREWED UP.
I DON'T SEE ANY PROTECTIONS
HERE AGAINST THAT.
I DON'T SEE ANY ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
THAT IF WE GO AHEAD AND
LIQUIDATE A SINGLE FAMILY FOR
LANDLORDS THAT THEY CAN'T GO
AHEAD AND CONTROL THE PRICING
AGAIN.
SO GIVE US THAT IF YOU'RE GOING
TO RAM THIS THROUGH WHICH YOU
ARE THERE IS NO VOTE FOR THE
GENERAL POPULATION.
DO US A FAVOR AND PUT IN
PROTECTIONS THAT YOU CAN'T BUY
THIS CITY FOR JUST PURE
INVESTMENT.
YOU CANNOT GO AHEAD AND FORCE
US OUT SO SOME RANDOM LANDLORD
CAN MAKE BILLIONS WHILE WE SIT
HERE TRYING TO FIGURE OUT OUR
OWN HOUSING SITUATION AND BEST
OF ALL DO US THE COURTESY
OF PUTTING IT UP FOR A VOTE
HONESTLY, I THINK YOU KNOW YOUR
PLAN IS UNPOPULAR IF IT WERE
TRULY POPULAR IT WOULD BE ON
THE MILEAGE AND WE WOULD HAVE A
SAY BUT I HAVE NONE SO WHAT
SOMEONE TOLD ME ON THE PLANNING
COMMISSION I GET A VOTE ON MY
OWN PROPERTY BUT NOT YOURS.
>> I GET A VOTE ON MY PROPERTY
.
THANK YOU.
YEAH,
DON'T TRY TO LIFT IT STORY.
THERE'S A THERE'S A BUTTON ON
THE INSIDE.
OH I DO YOU MAYBE IT'S ALL WE
TALK THAT I THINK SO.
>> MY NAME IS CHUCK PACKARD ST.
ANN ARBOR CANDIDATE FOR THE
THIRD WARD IN TWENTY TWENTY SIX
PRIMARY LARGELY ON THE BASIS
OF THIS STUFF IT IS TRUE THAT
CURRENT ZONING IS A RELIC
OF RACIST AND CLASSIST TIMES
AND WE NEED MUCH MORE DIVERSITY
IN HOUSING.
>> WE NEED MORE FLEXIBILITY AND
MORE MID-LEVEL HOUSING.
>> YES, ABSOLUTELY.
BUT IT'S ASTOUNDING TO ME THAT
THE PLANNING COMMISSION COULD
TAKE SUCH GOOD BASIC CONCEPTS
AND SCREW UP THIS COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN SO THOROUGHLY.
THIS PLAN REPRESENTS A COMPLETE
TAKEOVER OF INNER HARBOR BY
REAL ESTATE DEVELOPERS.
THE WORDS RATHER THAN OUR SO
PROMINENT HERE RATHER THAN
THINKING ABOUT PROTECTING THE
EXISTING CHARACTER AND NATURAL
FEATURES NATURAL ENVIRONMENT
OF BANABA FUTURE POLICY SHOULD
AIM FOR HOUSING BASICALLY FOR
PEOPLE WHO LIVE IN INNER HARBOR
THERE IS LOVE FOR PEOPLE WHO
LIVE IN HERE BUT THERE IS NO
RATHER THAN HERE LISTEN TO
THESE CODED THREATS PRIORITIZE
HOUSING DEVELOPMENT AND ABSURD
RESTRICTIONS AND CONSTRAINTS OR
WE WILL REWRITE ZONING CODE TO
REMOVE BARRIERS TO HOUSING
DEVELOPMENTS.
>> IT IS CLEAR THAT THEY WANT
TO BULLDOZE MUCH OF ANN ARBOR
AS WE KNOW IT THIS
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN HAS GOT TO
BE STOPPED THIS PLAN SAYS IT
WANTS BALANCE BUT TIPS THE
BALANCE TOWARD FIGURING IF THIS
PLAN CANNOT BE STOPPED THE MOST
CRITICAL THING IS TO MAKE SURE
THAT THE SAME PEOPLE WHO
CREATED IT ARE NOT HERE TO
INTERPRET IT.
THESE PEOPLE WILL GO ON
ENDLESSLY BEGINNING TO HAVE A
FINE CITY IN THE FUTURE.
>> WE NEED A NEW CITY COUNCIL
AND I'M AFRAID YOU ARE NOT
GOING TO THINK
OF SOME KIND
OF VALUES THAT ALLOW YOU TO
TRASH OUT ANN ARBOR NOT EVEN
WITH A LUXURY TRASH FOR
GENTRIFICATION.
>> THE CRITICAL POINT IS THAT
THERE MUST BE NO REDUCTION
OF BUILDINGS SETBACKS IN THE
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS, THE
RESIDENTIAL AREAS IF THERE IS
THE TREES WILL FALL AND WE WILL
ALL KNOW THAT THESE VALUES WERE
JUST A DIRTY TRICK.
>> THANK YOU SO MUCH.
THANK YOU
.
HELLO, I'M FORMER CITY COUNCIL
WOMAN AND BANNISTER FROM NORTH
MAIN STREET AND I'M HERE
TONIGHT TO ASK YOU TO PLEASE
PAUSE THIS PLAN THAT WILL HAVE
SERIOUS REPCO OPTIONS FOR THE
FUTURE OF OUR CITY.
OUR CITY COUNCIL HAS PAID NINE
HUNDRED THOUSAND MILLION
DOLLARS FOR A PLAN THAT WON'T
WORK.
IT WON'T ACHIEVE THE GOALS THAT
HAVE BEEN PROMISED TO US
AFFORDABILITY, SUSTAINABLE AND
EQUITY ARE SADLY NOT GOING TO
BE ACHIEVED WITH THIS PLAN.
THE PLAN IS WOEFULLY INADEQUATE
IN ON DETAILS WITH THE
ADMINISTRATION PUSHING A
POLITICAL NARRATIVE.
THE DETAILS WILL COME LATER.
FOR EXAMPLE, ONE OF THE MOST
IMPORTANT THINGS THE PLAN LACKS
STRATEGIES TO PROTECT OUR
ENVIRONMENT, NATURAL FEATURES
AND EXISTING TREES FROM THE
IMPACTS OF THE DEVELOPMENT AND
RESULTING GREATER STORMWATER
RUNOFF.
THE PLAN ALSO DOES NOT
SUFFICIENTLY DESCRIBE THE
CAPACITY OF OUR WATER STORM
WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS AND THE
COST OF THE UPGRADES REQUIRED
FOR FUTURE GROWTH.
PLEASE PAUSE THIS PLAN AND
CONDUCT AN INFRASTRUCTURE
CAPACITY STUDY.
I'M CONCERNED THAT DEVELOPERS
WILL BE ALLOWED DEVELOPERS WILL
BE ALLOWED TO BUILD BY RIGHT ON
ANY WITH REDUCED SETBACKS FROM
ADJACENT PROPERTIES AND SADLY
WITHOUT PUBLIC HEARINGS OR
NOTICE.
PUT SIMPLY THIS PLAN IS MISSING
THE FACTS WE NEED.
IT IGNORES THE INFRASTRUCTURE
THAT MAKES GROWTH POSSIBLE.
IT OFFERS NO SOLUTIONS TO MAKE
HOUSING AFFORDABLE AND IT HAS
BEEN DEVELOPED WITH FAR TOO
LITTLE RESIDENT INPUT.
I RESPECTFULLY ASK THE PLANNING
COMMISSION TO SEND THIS PLAN
BACK TO STAFF FOR REVISION TO
INCLUDE CLEAR DELIVERABLES SUCH
AS INDEPENDENT STUDIES ON
POPULATION PROJECTIONS, HOUSING
NEEDS AND INFRASTRUCTURE
CAPACITY AND A CONCRETE
AFFORDABILITY PACKAGE WITH
SPECIFIC POLICIES AND
MEASURABLE TARGETS.
I URGE RESIDENTS WHO WANT TO
LEARN MORE TO SUBSCRIBE TO THE
PETTENGILL NEW NEIGHBORHOOD
ASSOCIATION NEWSLETTER SHARE
YOUR INPUT ON THE DAY TO PASS
THE PLAN DOT COM WEBSITE AND
THE FACEBOOK GROUP AND OUR
PUBLIC POLICY AND WATCH
EXCELLENT SUMMARIZING VIDEOS
FROM OUR FORMER COUNCIL MEMBER
ELIZABETH NELSON AT TO ELMAU
DOT COM.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
MR CHAIRMAN AND
MEMBERS OF THE COMMISSION.
GOOD EVENING.
MY NAME IS AARON JAY PUNO AND
FIRST OF ALL I THINK WHOEVER
BROUGHT THE FOOD I JUST LIKE TO
UP AND SAY THANK YOU FOR THIS
WONDERFUL FOOD FROM THE FOURTH
WARD AND I ADDRESS YOU TONIGHT
IN THE SAME OUTFIT I WORE WHEN
WHEN I LED OUR PIONEER J.B.
LACROSSE TEAM TO AN UNDEFEATED
SEASON IN MY SENIOR YEAR.
AND I HOPE THAT IT UNDERSCORES
HOW MUCH I LOVE THIS CITY, HOW
MUCH I LOVE THIS CITY AND HOW
MUCH I'M GOING TO FIGHT FOR IT
.
I WENT TO BRYANT, I WENT TO
PATTENGALE.
I WENT TO TAP IN TO COMMUNITY
TO PIONEER.
NOW I'M HERE AT THE UNIVERSITY
OF MICHIGAN AND ALL OF THAT
COULD HAVE GONE UP IN SMOKE IF
NOT FOR THE FACT THAT MY FOLKS
HAD TO WAIT FOR AN ECONOMIC
DOWNTURN THE RECESSION OF 2008
TO AFFORD A LOVELY HOME IN
GEORGETOWN TO QUOTE FOR ONCE IN
MY LIFE MY MORE ACTIVIST
COLLEAGUES THIS STATUS QUO HAS
GOT TO GO.
WHY SHOULD PEOPLE LIKE ME
BEFORE TO WAIT FOR THE ECONOMY
TO CRASH TO AFFORD A HOME, AN
APARTMENT IN THIS BEAUTIFUL
CITY THIS CITY TOOK IN AN
IMMIGRANT FAMILY, A UNION NURSE
AND AN AIRLINE WORKER AND
TREATED WITH RESPECT, WITH
DIGNITY AND WITH WORLD CLASS
PUBLIC SERVICES AND THAT FUTURE
MUST NOT BE DENIED MUST NOT BE
DENIED TO MORE PEOPLE SIMPLY
BECAUSE WE FAIL TO BUILD MORE
HOMES WE NEED TO BUILD MORE
HOMES.
MANY FOLKS HERE WITH THE BEST
OF INTENTIONS WANT TO PROTECT
OUR ENVIRONMENT.
AND I TELL YOU I SAY WHAT'S
WORSE FOR THE ENVIRONMENT
BURNING ONE TOWER OR HOWEVER
MANY TOWERS ARE NECESSARY OR
THE SUBURBANIZATION OF THE REST
OF OUR WETLANDS, OUR FORESTS,
OUR FARMLANDS AND THE FAILED
SUBURBAN POLICIES OF OUR BROOKS
PATTERSON.
>> WE NEED MORE HOMES AND I
RAISE YOU I RAISE YOU THIS.
LET US GO ONE STEP FURTHER.
LET US SERIOUSLY EXPLORE THE
IDEAL OF SOCIAL HOUSING NOW
IT'S EXPENSIVE FOR LOCAL
GOVERNMENTS TO START BUILDING
HOMES.
WE'RE NOT IN THAT SORT
OF BUSINESS BUT WE ARE IN THE
BUSINESS OF WE CAN BE IN THE
BUSINESS OF BUYING HOMES.
WE CAN BUY UNITS, WE CAN BUY
UNITS AND LEASE IT OUT TO THOSE
WHO NEED IT MOST.
WE MUST EXPLORE EVERY POSSIBLE
OPTION, EVERY POSSIBLE OPTION
TO ENSURE THAT MY FUTURE IN THE
CITY THAT ALL OF OUR FUTURES IN
THE CITY WILL NOT BE HELD
HOSTAGE BY THE INTRANSIGENCE
OF THE PAST.
WE MUST BUILD MORE HOMES.
WE MUST PASS THIS PLAN.
GO TIGERS, GO BLUE.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
THANK YOU.
GOOD EVENING.
I'M JAMIE HODGES ONE TWO TWO
FIVE KENSINGTON DRIVE IN ANN
ARBOR.
MY HOME ABUTS TO INDUSTRIAL
HIGHWAY AND A CHAIN LINK FENCE
KEEPS ME AWAY FROM INDUSTRIAL
AND HIGHWAY AND I'M NOT SURE
WITH THIS CURRENT THIRD OF WHAT
THE YELLOW SHADED AREA MEANS IS
IT TRANSIT AREA?
IS IT A MANUFACTURING AREA OR
IS IT SMALL MANUFACTURING OR
LARGE MANUFACTURING?
IF YOU LOOK AT THE ENTIRE MAP
OF THE CITY YOU WILL SEE THAT
THAT MY NEIGHBORHOOD WHICH IS
CALLED CORKINS NEIGHBORHOOD IS
SLATED FOR THE GREATEST AMOUNT
OF IMPACT.
WE ARE TARGETED MAINLY DUE TO
OUR SMALL HOMES ON RELATIVELY
LARGE LOTS THAT ARE MOST
AFFORDABLE FOR DEVELOPERS TO
PURCHASE THIS PLAN COULD
TRANSFER MANY OF US INTO WHAT
YOU CALL TRANSITION INSTEAD A
SINGLE FAMILY SMALL SINGLE
FAMILY HOME THAT IT TOOK ME
FOREVER TO AFFORD.
BUT I LOVE IT.
I WAS DRIVING DURING THE LATEST
DOWNPOUR AND HAVE PICTURES
SHOWING THE FLOODING STREETS
WHERE I COULD NOT EVEN DRIVE
THROUGH THEM.
I HAD TO TURN AROUND BACK UP
THESE ROADSIDE ROADS I
ENCOUNTERED WERE INDUSTRIAL
HIGHWAY AND JEWITT ROAD AND
THAT IS IN MY NEIGHBORHOOD
WHICH COULD BE DEVELOPED QUITE
,QUITE LITERALLY.
WE NEED TO PROMOTE ANN ARBOR
COMMUNITY LAND TRUSTS KEEP IT
AS IT WAS ORIGINALLY CREATED .
DO NOT DILUTE THIS FORWARD
THINKING PROJECT.
THE ORIGINAL LAND TRUST HAD
REAL MEANING.
IT WAS DESIGNED TO ADD AND
BLEND DUPLEXES TRIPLEX IS IT
EVEN THREE STOREY INTO EXISTING
NEIGHBORHOODS AND NOT ADD MONEY
TO DEVELOPERS POCKETS.
THANK YOU.
HI GOOD EVENING.
MY NAME'S CURTIS DAVIS.
I'M A NATIVE OF AN ARMORED WARD
ONE I AM HERE MAYBE NOT
SPEAKING TO THE CORRECT
AUDIENCE BUT I HAVE LIVED HERE
ALL MY LIFE.
I AM CURRENTLY ASKING WHY HIS
DOOR DESIGNATION BE EXTENDED TO
INCLUDE THE AREA IS BETWEEN
KINGSLEE AND DEPOS STREET ON
4TH AND 5TH AVENUE AND
INCLUDING DIVISION TO SUMMIT.
THESE WERE THE FOUNDATIONAL
NEIGHBORHOODS FOR IMMIGRANT AND
BLACK FAMILIES DUE TO REDLINING
AND RACIST BANKING AND REAL
ESTATE POLICIES IN THE PAST
THESE POLICIES THROUGH
DECEPTION AND EXCLUSION LED TO
THE GENTRIFICATION WE NOW HAVE
THOSE WHO HOLD ON ARE OWED AT
LEAST THAT THE CLUB WILL ALLOW
SINGLE FAMILY HOMES DATING BACK
TO THE 90S TO BE TARGETED AND
TORN DOWN AND REPLACED BY
MILLION DOLLAR UNITS AND
REPLACED A HISTORY OF WHAT THE
ORIGINALS KNEW AS THE VILLAGE.
AND I'M JUST ASKING THAT WE
PAUSE THE PLAN AND CONSIDERING
THIS NEIGHBORHOOD THAT REALLY
IS THE HUB OF OUR AMBITIOUS
IT'S IN OUR ECONOMIC ENGINE
HERE IN ANN ARBOR BE CONSIDERED
A PLACE THAT WE REALLY WANT TO
CONTINUE TO SUSTAIN AND NOT LET
IT BE WASHED AWAY.
>> THAT'S ALL I HAVE.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
HI, I'M TRACY SWINBURNE.
I LIVE POTTER AVENUE.
I'M HERE ASKING FOR THE
MICROPHONE.
THANKS.
I'M HERE TO ASK YOU TO PLEASE
PAUSE AND RECONSIDER THE PLAN.
I KNOW FOR ME AND FOR SO MANY
OTHERS THAT I KNOW WHO ARE
ASKING TO OPPOSE THE PLAN IT'S
NOT BECAUSE WE OPPOSE HOUSING
GROWTH OR INCREASED DENSITY OR
THAT WE'RE JUST PLAYING
LOBBYISTS.
IT'S BECAUSE WE'RE CONCERNED
THAT THIS PLAN IS OPENING UP
REALLY LARGE SWATHS OF LAND FOR
DEVELOPERS AND THAT IT'S IN
DEVELOPERS BEST INTERESTS
RATHER THAN THE CITY RESIDENTS
OF ANN ARBOR.
WE THINK WE'RE WORTHY OF A
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN PROCESS
THAT'S MORE DETAILED, MORE
SPECIFIC DRAWS UP SCENARIOS TO
ALLOW RESIDENTS TO ENGAGE MORE
MEANINGFULLY HAS THE KIND
OF TRANSPORT IMPACT ASSESSMENTS
SCENARIO DEVELOPMENT WATER
SEWER SCHOOLS, UTILITY
SCENARIOS AND COSTS AND
BENEFITS SO THAT WE CAN THEN
MEANINGFULLY ENGAGE CITIZENS ON
THOSE DIFFERENT POSSIBILITIES
AND SCENARIOS AND ALLOW THEM TO
CONTRIBUTE MORE MEANINGFULLY.
RIGHT NOW IT'S BEEN REALLY HARD
FOR CITIZENS TO CONTRIBUTE
BECAUSE IT'S BEEN SO VAGUE AND
UNCLEAR WHAT EXACTLY PEOPLE ARE
TALKING ABOUT.
BUT WE THINK WE COULD MAKE MORE
EFFICIENT AND EFFECTIVE
CONTRIBUTION IF PEOPLE HAD
SCENARIOS AND DATA AND
INFORMATION ON PUBLIC COSTS,
BENEFITS AND TAX AND WHERE MOST
EFFICIENTLY AND MORE
SPECIFICALLY PLANNING AND
DEVELOPMENT COULD GO INSTEAD
OF JUST REALLY WIDE SWATHS
OF OPEN DEVELOPMENT WHERE
DEVELOPERS WOULD THEN BE IN THE
DRIVER'S TO CHOOSE WHERE AND
HOW MUCH DEVELOPMENT OCCURS.
THE PLANNING PROCESS IS MEANT
TO BE THE INSTRUMENT THAT CURBS
THE MARKET FAILURES
OF DEVELOPERS WHO WILL BE
DEVELOPING INDIVIDUAL PARCELS
ONE AT A TIME TO MAXIMIZE THEIR
BENEFIT AS WE KNOW THEY DO.
BUT THE PLANNING PROCESS IS THE
WAY THAT WE CAN MAKE IT INSTEAD
A PLACE THAT MOST BENEFITS OUR
COMMUNITY AND WE NEED TO HAVE A
REALLY STRONG PROCESS MORE
LIMITING, MORE SPECIFIC TO MAKE
SURE THAT WE DON'T END UP WITH
JUST PASS AT A TIME BEING
DEVELOPED FOR MAXIMUM PROFIT
RATHER THAN A COMMUNITY.
WE CAN DO IT MUCH BETTER IF WE
HAVE A STRONGER PLANNING
PROCESS WITH THE KIND
OF METRICS EVALUATION STRATEGY
SCENARIO DEVELOPMENT THAT
ALLOWS PEOPLE TO CONTRIBUTE
MORE MEANINGFULLY.
SO I AM ASKING TO PARTICIPATE
ON THAT BASIS NOT BECAUSE WE'RE
NIMBUS OR WE DON'T WANT MORE
HOUSING, WE DON'T WANT MORE
AFFORDABLE HOUSING.
IN FACT WE REALLY DO.
BUT WE THINK THAT THIS PLAN
INSTEAD IS OPENING THINGS UP
FOR MAXIMUM PROFIT FOR
DEVELOPERS RATHER THAN MAKING
THE BEST COMMUNITY FOR OUR AND
OUR RESIDENTS.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
GOOD EVENING.
PLANNING COMMISSION.
MY NAME IS ERIC SHALL I GO AND
I LIVE IN WARD FOUR.
I'M SURE WE'RE IN FOR A VERY,
VERY LONG PUBLIC COMMENT PERIOD
TONIGHT.
SO AFTER THAT I WANT TO THANK
YOU FOR ALL YOUR HARD WORK
ENGAGE IN COMMUNITY IN DRAFTING
THE PLAN AND GOD WILLING THIRD
TIME'S THE CHARM AFTER READING
IT.
I HOPE THAT CITY COUNCIL ADOPTS
THEIR DRAFT IN ITS ENTIRETY AND
STARTS BUILDING IN ANN ARBOR
ALL IT GIVES ME HOPE THAT MY
HOMETOWN WILL CREATE ABUNDANT
HOUSING, HELP FOLKS AFFORD TO
LIVE HERE AND BECOME EVEN MORE
VIBRANT, DIVERSE AND
SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITY.
TO BE HONEST IT MAKES ME
HOPEFUL FOR ANN ARBOR WHEN
ABOUT A YEAR AGO I WAS
SKEPTICAL IT WOULD EVER GET
BETTER AND THOUGHT ABOUT
LEAVING.
I'VE SEEN THE POSITIVE IN
ACTION FROM MY NEIGHBORS
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
PROVIDING DINNER TO EVERYONE IN
COUNCIL CHAMBERS SO I COULD BE
PART OF THE CIVIC PROCESS WHERE
HAVE TO WORK.
I'M EXCITED TO SEE CHANGE
FINALLY HAPPEN.
I KNOW THERE'S PLENTY OF WORK
AFTER THIS BUT IT'S REFRESHING
TO SEE THE MAJORITY OF THE
CITY'S ENERGIZED FOR MORE
OF EVERYTHING WE KNOW THAT THE
STATUS QUO HASN'T WORKED AND
THE ONLY WAY TO FIX OUR HOUSING
IS PROGRESSING, NOT PASSING.
>> THANK YOU FOR YOUR TIME AND
I'LL BE A GREAT EVENING.
THANK YOU.
GOOD EVENING KATHY GRISWOLD.
I WANT TO THANK ALL OF THE
PLANNING COMMISSIONERS AND I
WANT TO THANK EVERYONE IN THE
ROOM.
I THINK THAT WE'RE HERE TONIGHT
BECAUSE WE TRULY CARE ABOUT OUR
COMMUNITY.
WE TRULY CARE ABOUT THE
DIRECTION OF OUR COMMUNITY AND
DENSITY IS INEVITABLE.
BUT THE QUESTION IS HOW DO WE
GET THERE?
>> AND I THINK A LOT OF THE
DISAGREEMENTS AND THE MISSING
YOU GET CLOSER IN ARE THE
RESULT OF TWO DIFFERENT VIEWS
ONE MORE OF A POLICY VIEW AND
THE OTHER ONE MORE OF A
PRACTICAL VIEW.
AND A WOMAN WHO SPOKE TO
SPEAKERS BEFORE ME ALLUDED TO
THAT.
AND I JUST WANT TO GIVE YOU ONE
EXAMPLE.
AFFORDABILITY IS VERY, VERY
IMPORTANT IN AN AREA WHERE WE
TALK ABOUT AFFORDABILITY ALL
THE TIME.
>> HOWEVER, WE NOW HAVE BEFORE
US ON NOVEMBER 4TH A REGRESSIVE
PROPERTY TAX INCREASE ONE NIL
THAT WILL RETURN OVER TEN
YEARS.
TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY MILLION
DOLLARS TO THE WUIS D THAT'S
DOLLARS THAT WILL BE TAKEN AWAY
TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY MILLION
FROM HARD WORKING INDIVIDUALS.
DOLLARS THAT WILL BE TAKEN AWAY
SO WE NEED TO MAKE THE DECISION
FROM HARD WORKING INDIVIDUALS.
DO WE SUPPORT AFFORDABILITY OR
SO WE NEED TO MAKE THE DECISION
DO WE SUPPORT YET ANOTHER
DO WE SUPPORT AFFORDABILITY OR
PROPERTY TAX INCREASE?
DO WE SUPPORT YET ANOTHER
I THINK WE HAVE THAT BEFORE US
PROPERTY TAX INCREASE?
AND I ALSO WANT TO MENTION
I THINK WE HAVE THAT BEFORE US
BECAUSE IT'S REALLY TROUBLING
AND I ALSO WANT TO MENTION
TO ME AND I'M SOMEONE WHO WAS A
BECAUSE IT'S REALLY TROUBLING
SCHOOL BOARD MEMBER.
TO ME AND I'M SOMEONE WHO WAS A
I WAS A FOSTER PARENT.
SCHOOL BOARD MEMBER.
I VOLUNTEERED IN THE SCHOOLS.
I WAS A FOSTER PARENT.
I'M VERY COMMITTED TO EDUCATION
I VOLUNTEERED IN THE SCHOOLS.
BUT THIS MILLAGE IS TAKING ONE
I'M VERY COMMITTED TO EDUCATION
MILLION DOLLARS OUT OF THE
BUT THIS MILLAGE IS TAKING ONE
CLASSROOM TO PAY FOR THIS
MILLION DOLLARS OUT OF THE
SPECIAL ELECTION.
CLASSROOM TO PAY FOR THIS
ALL OF THE SIGNAGE YOU SEE AT
SPECIAL ELECTION.
THE SCHOOLS AND IN PEOPLE'S
ALL OF THE SIGNAGE YOU SEE AT
FRONT YARD DOES NOT SAY PAID
THE SCHOOLS AND IN PEOPLE'S
FOR BY THE CAMPAIGN FOR IT SAYS
FRONT YARD DOES NOT SAY PAID
PAID FOR BY WUIS DE ISD IS ME
FOR BY THE CAMPAIGN FOR IT SAYS
AND YOU IF YOU'RE TRULY
PAID FOR BY WUIS DE ISD IS ME
COMMITTED TO AFFORDABILITY, IF
AND YOU IF YOU'RE TRULY
YOU'RE TRULY COMMITTED TO
COMMITTED TO AFFORDABILITY, IF
KEEPING MONEY IN THE CLASSROOM
YOU'RE TRULY COMMITTED TO
FOR OUR STUDENTS YOU WILL VOTE
KEEPING MONEY IN THE CLASSROOM
NO ON NOVEMBER 4TH.
FOR OUR STUDENTS YOU WILL VOTE
THANK YOU.
NO ON NOVEMBER 4TH.
HI.
THANK YOU.
I'M JOSH JACOBSON FIFTH WARD.
HI.
I'D LIKE TO JUST ENCOURAGE THE
I'M JOSH JACOBSON FIFTH WARD.
COUNCIL TODAY TO APPROVE THE
I'D LIKE TO JUST ENCOURAGE THE
COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE PLAN
COUNCIL TODAY TO APPROVE THE
THAT WENT ON THE CITY COUNCIL.
COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE PLAN
IT FEELS LIKE BY OPPOSING THE
THAT WENT ON THE CITY COUNCIL.
PLAN WE'VE SPENT MONTHS AND
IT FEELS LIKE BY OPPOSING THE
MONTHS REVISING, UPDATING AND
PLAN WE'VE SPENT MONTHS AND
SPENDING HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS
MONTHS REVISING, UPDATING AND
OF DOLLARS ON CONSULTING FEES.
SPENDING HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS
WE HAVE A LONG ROAD AHEAD
OF DOLLARS ON CONSULTING FEES.
OF US.
WE HAVE A LONG ROAD AHEAD
WE STILL HAVE A LOT OF WORK TO
OF US.
DO TO GET MORE AFFORDABLE
WE STILL HAVE A LOT OF WORK TO
HOUSING IN THIS COMMUNITY AND I
DO TO GET MORE AFFORDABLE
WOULD ENCOURAGE THAT WE START
HOUSING IN THIS COMMUNITY AND I
THE NEXT STEP OF THAT PROCESS
WOULD ENCOURAGE THAT WE START
AND PASS THIS TODAY.
THE NEXT STEP OF THAT PROCESS
>> THANK YOU.
AND PASS THIS TODAY.
THANK YOU
.
>> GOOD EVENING JEFFREY.
POST POSTWOMAN TO BARNETT
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN HOSPITAL
A LONG TIME AGO.
MY NAME IS JEFFREY POST.
I'M A RESIDENT AND REALTOR IN
ANN ARBOR AND I DON'T JUST SELL
HOMES.
I HELP PEOPLE IMAGINE OUR
FUTURE HERE.
I'M PROUD TO SAY THAT ALONG
WITH HUNDREDS MY REALTOR
COLLEAGUES WE ARE OFTEN THE
FIRST PEOPLE TO INTRODUCE NEW
RESIDENTS TO.
WHAT MAKES THIS CITY SPECIAL IS
NEIGHBORHOODS, ITS SENSE
OF PLACE AND ITS CHARACTER.
BUT THAT PRIDE IS INCREASINGLY
COMES WITH CONCERN BECAUSE WHEN
I SIT ACROSS THE TABLE FROM
BUYERS TODAY THE BIGGEST
QUESTIONS THEY'RE ASKING ARE
NOT SQUARE FOOTAGE AND SCHOOL
DISTRICTS.
THEY'RE ASKING WHAT MIGHT BE
BUILT NEXT DOOR.
I HEAR A LOT ABOUT MULTIUNIT
ALL THESE HIGH RISES THAT ARE
BEING BUILT EVERYWHERE.
>> THEY DON'T EVEN LOOK LIKE
THEY BELONG IN A COLLEGE TOWN.
THE TAXES ARE CRAZY HIGH HERE.
CAN WE ALSO ADD TOWNSHIPS TO
OUR SEARCH?
REAL ESTATE AGENTS ARE KEY
STAKEHOLDERS AND AMBASSADORS TO
THIS TOWN.
THE UNCERTAINTY AROUND WHAT WE
CAN AND WILL BE DEVELOPED IS
REAL AND IT'S AMPLIFIED BY THE
PERCEPTION THAT DECISIONS ARE
BEING MADE WITHOUT THE VOICES
OF RESIDENTS TRULY AT THE TABLE
.
THE RECENT REMOVAL OF THE
DESIGN REVIEW BOARD COMBINED
WITH FEWER PUBLIC HEARINGS HAS
LEFT MANY FEELING UNHEARD IN
SHAPING THE PHYSICAL IDENTITY
OF THEIR OWN COMMUNITY.
MEANWHILE, THE UNIVERSITY
MICHIGAN, OUR LARGEST AND
LIKELY MOST INFLUENTIAL
ROOMMATE HAS JUST FORMED ITS
OWN DESIGN REVIEW COMMITTEE
STATING THAT THE CHARACTER
OF OUR PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT THE
WAY IT'S ORGANIZED PLANNED AND
DEVELOPED IS GOING TO
ACCELERATE THE ACHIEVEMENT
OF INSTITUTIONAL GOALS.
THAT IS A CLEAR INTENTIONAL
DESIGN PHILOSOPHY AND FRANKLY
IT'S ONE OUR CITY SHOULD SHARE
AND BE A CRITICAL PART OF THE
FUTURE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN IN ITS
CURRENT FORM DOES NOT YET
REFLECT THAT PHILOSOPHY OR
PARTNERSHIP.
IT TREATS THE UNIVERSITY IN THE
CITY AS PARALLEL TRACKS RATHER
THAN SHARED LANDSCAPE.
BUT IF AND OUR BRIDGE TO REMAIN
THE PLACE WE FELL IN LOVE WITH
SMART BEAUTIFUL FORWARD
THINKING AND LIVABLE THAT
RELATIONSHIP MUST BE
INTENTIONAL, COLLABORATIVE AND
INTEGRATED INTO THE PLAN
ITSELF.
SO TONIGHT I'M ASKING THE
COMMITTEE TO MAKE A COMMITMENT
A PROMISE TO START WALKING IN
STRIDE WITH THE UNIVERSITY NOT
BEHIND IT TO ENSURE THAT AS WE
GROW WE GROW TOGETHER GUIDED BY
SHARED DESIGN PRINCIPLES,
THOUGHTFUL DENSITY AND UNIFIED
VISION FOR WHAT OUR CITY LOOKS
AND FEELS LIKE BECAUSE THE
PEOPLE WHO ARE MOVING HERE,
INVESTING HERE AND RAISING
FAMILIES HERE, THEY'RE NOT JUST
BUYING HOMES.
THEY'RE BUYING INTO OUR STORY.
LET'S MAKE SURE THAT STORY
STILL LOOKS, SOUNDS AND FEELS
LIKE ANN ARBOR.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
>> GOOD EVENING.
MY NAME IS RICHARD GO BECAUSE
I'M ON BOARD FOR BECAUSE I LOOK
OVER YOUR THIRD DRAFT PLAN FOR
THE ENTIRE CITY AND PAY
ATTENTION ESPECIALLY TO THE
TRANSITION ZONE SO I CAN'T HELP
BUT SEE THAT THE MOST
AFFORDABLE SECTION OF TOWN IS
BEING MOVED INTO TRANSITION
MORE THAN THE REST OF THE CITY
AS I KEEP IN MIND THE STATED
GOALS OF YOUR PLAN THAT BEING
AFFORDABILITY THIS PLAN MAKES
LITTLE SENSE TO ME.
I'M NOT AGAINST CHANGE NOR AM I
AGAINST DENSITY IF DONE
CORRECTLY IN MY MIND WHAT MAKES
THE MOST SENSE FOR THE CITY IS
TO INCREASE DUPLEXES ESPECIALLY
LIKE THE ANN ARBOR COMMUNITY
LAND TRUSTS.
THIS WOULD MAKE IT POSSIBLE FOR
CITY WORKERS TO LIVE HERE IN
ORDER TO HAVE AFFORDABLE
HOUSING WE ACTUALLY HAVE TO
BUILD AND I DON'T THINK THAT
YOU'RE GOING TO FIND THAT FROM
DEVELOPERS.
HERE'S A PICTURE A BLOW UP OF A
SECTION THAT THAT I'M MOST
CONCERNED ABOUT.
HERE'S A PICTURE OF FOURTH WARD
WHERE MOST OF THESE SMALLER AND
MORE REASONABLY PRICED HOMES
ARE LOCATED BETWEEN PACARD AND
S INDUSTRIAL.
YOU'LL SEE THAT NOT JUST THAT
TRANSITION ENCROACHES IN
CIRCLES BUT ALSO SQUEEZES OUT
THE REMAINING HOMES.
THIS WILL ACCELERATE THE LOSS
OF MODERATELY PRICED HOMES AS
THEY ARE TURNED INTO RENTALS.
THESE WON'T BE MODERATELY
PRICED RENTALS BUT UPSCALE ONES
AIMED OF AT THE AFFLUENT AND AS
THAT HAPPENS THE PROPERTY
VALUES FOR THE LAND TRUST WILL
BE BID UP BEYOND THEIR REACH
.
THE WHOLE AREA OF THE CITY
WHERE I LIVE IS VULNERABLE AND
IS THREATENED BY DEVELOPERS
BECAUSE OF YOUR PLAN WHEN I ASK
WHY THE STARS ARE NOT EXCLUDED
I'M TOLD TO WAIT FOR THE ZONING
SINCE THAT'S WHERE ALL THE
IMPORTANT DECISIONS WILL BE
MADE.
THE SAME ANSWER IS GIVEN WHEN I
ASK ABOUT TREES AND SHADING
OF SOLAR PANELS THE PLANTS
INTENTIONALLY VAGUE TO ME USING
SUCH TERMS AS STORIES INSTEAD
OF FEET SINCE A STORY CAN BE
OF DIFFERENT HEIGHTS WHILE FEET
CANNOT I READ I READ THAT THE
ANN ARBOR IS THE MOST EDUCATED
CITY IN AMERICA SO WHY HAVEN'T
YOU ENLISTED US IN YOUR PLAN
TOGETHER WE COULD MAKE A CITY
MUCH MORE AFFORDABLE.
THERE IS NO DEADLINE SO WHY
DON'T YOU PAUSE THIS PLAN AND
INCLUDE US SO WE CAN GET IT
RIGHT?
>> WE CAN DO BETTER.
THANK YOU
.
OH GOOD EVENING.
MY NAME IS ALEXANDER TAYLOR AND
I AM FOR MORE HOUSING IN ANN
ARBOR AND ALLOWING MORE PEOPLE
TO CALL THIS FINE CITY HOME.
>> THE QUESTION TO ME IS WHO IS
TO BENEFIT AND AT WHAT COST?
>> I AM FORTUNATE ENOUGH TO
CALL MYSELF A HOMEOWNER HERE IN
THE CITY OF ANN ARBOR AND A
DESIRE TO HAVE THAT OPPORTUNITY
TO REACH FOR MORE PEOPLE THAT
WORK HERE AND WANT TO CREATE A
LIFE HERE.
>> EXORBITANT INCENTIVES ARE
DEVELOPED WITH THESE PRIORITIES
IN MIND.
I BELIEVE THIS IS POSSIBLE WHEN
I LOOK AT THE LAST PUBLIC
ZONING MAP AND SUPPORTING
LITERATURE.
>> HOWEVER, I SEE OPPORTUNITIES
FOR DEVELOPERS AND INVESTORS TO
MAXIMIZE PROFITS LIKE WE HAVE
SEEN IN OUR DOWNTOWN PRICE
FIXING TO MAXIMIZE PROFITS
RATHER THAN MAXIMIZE UTILIZED
OUT OF THE LAND AND CULTURE WE
HAVE TO OFFER WHEN OUR PREVIOUS
APARTMENT COMPLEX CHANGED
MANAGEMENT SIMILAR BEHAVIOR
OCCURRED, PRICES WENT UP AND SO
DID VACANCES VACANCIES OR FOR
PROFITS NOT FOR THE RESIDENTS
CHANGES NECESSARY CHANGE CAN BE
PROGRESS FOR THE BETTERMENT
OF MOST ZONING IS DONE WITH
BROAD BRUSHSTROKES DISRUPT IS
FRONT AND CENTER RATHER THAN
CREATING AFFORDABILITY
OPPORTUNITY FOR RESIDENTS.
I'M A WARD TO RESIDENT LIVING
ON YORKETOWN DRIVE NEAR THE
PLIMOTH CORRIDOR.
IF YOU LOOK AT THE LATEST
PUBLISHED DRAFT OUR HOME AND
OUR NEIGHBORS HOMES CHANGE FROM
OUR ONE C TO TRANSITION ZONE,
OUR COMMUNITY POOL AND THE LOTS
IMMEDIATELY ADJACENT TO OUR
WANNSEE NEIGHBORS LABOR CLUB.
I UNDERSTAND THAT HAVING A
NORTHEAST HUB IS THE VISION BUT
THE LINES SEEM TO BE HASTILY
DRAWN WITHOUT FULL
UNDERSTANDING FROM ABOUT THE
RESIDENTS THAT CURRENTLY LIVE
HERE.
I ENCOURAGE YOU TO REEVALUATE
TO UNDERSTAND THE DESIRES
OF EACH NEIGHBORHOOD AND CREATE
A PLAN THAT REFLECTS
OPPORTUNITY AND EQUITY FOR
RESIDENTS ABOVE INVESTORS.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
HI MY NAME IS LARRY HAGGERTY.
I'M A RESIDENT OF HATHAWAY ON
WARD TWO.
I'VE LIVED IN ANN ARBOR AND
BEEN A HOMEOWNERS SINCE 1980 SO
FOR ABOUT FORTY FIVE YEARS AND
I'VE NEVER BEEN TO A MEETING
LIKE THIS LET ALONE SPEAK TO IT
BEFORE.
SO IT MAY SPEAK TO THE
IMPORTANCE I THINK OF THIS THIS
PLAN THAT'S BEEN DEVELOPED.
I'VE I'VE A FEW OBSERVATIONS.
THE FIRST ONE IS THAT THE
PREMISE THAT THIS PLAN REFLECTS
THE ENTIRE ARAB COMMUNITY I
THINK IS VERY FLAWED.
IT'S DIRECTION AND PRIORITIES
ARE DRIVEN BY A LIKE MINDED
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL AND THE
SIMILARLY HAND-PICKED LIKE
MINDED PLANNING COMMISSION
OPPORTUNITIES FOR EARLY INPUT.
WE'RE NOT WELL COMMUNICATED IN
BROAD PARTICIPATION WAS LIMITED
UNLINED INPUT WAS DISTILLED BY
A WELL INTENTIONED BUT STILL
BIASED MINDSET QUOTES ARE
CLEARLY CHOSEN TO REINFORCE A
FEW CONCERNING VIEWS ARE NOTED
IN PASSING BUT ESSENTIALLY
DISMISSED NOW THAT THE DRAFT
SOME DETAILS ARE OUT.
I THINK THERE'S A LOT
OF INTEREST IN IN PROVIDING
MORE FEEDBACK WHERE IT CAN IT
CAN MAKE A DIFFERENCE AND THE
ATTENDANCE TONIGHT DURING A
TIGERS GAME IS PROBABLY A
REFLECTION OF THAT SPECIFICS.
THE SECOND POINT IS SPECIFICS
ABOUT THE ECONOMIC VIABILITY
OF THIS PLAN WITH RESPECT TO
INFRASTRUCTURE IN THE TAX BASE
ARE TOUCHED UPON.
BUT JUST THERE'S NO SPECIFICS.
THERE'S NO DETAILS.
THERE'S NO REAL ANALYSIS
OF WHAT THAT'S GOING TO GET IF
THE ECONOMICS THIS PLAN AREN'T
GOING TO WORK, THE PLAN ISN'T
GOING TO WORK.
THIRD POINT, PLEASE BE
PARTICULARLY MINDFUL OF HOW
THIS PLAN AND ITS RELATED
ACTIONS AND INACTIONS AS WELL
ARE IMPACTING THE BUSINESS
COMMUNITY AND I DON'T MEAN THE
DEVELOPMENT COMMUNITY.
I MEAN THE BUSINESS COMMUNITY
IN THE TOWN BUSINESS
AFFORDABILITY AND PUBLIC SAFETY
ARE NECESSARY FOR THE WALKABLE
AND DIVERSE COMBINED
RESIDENTIAL AND BUSINESS
COMMUNITIES WITH AFFORDABLE
HOUSING THAT YOU'RE LOOKING
THAT YOU'RE SEEKING.
THOSE ARE ALL NOBLE GOALS BUT
MANY IN THE BUSINESS COMMUNITY
ARE VERY ANXIOUS.
>> THE NEXT POINT I THINK IS
WAS RAISED BEFORE ABOUT TRUST.
FOURTH POINT HERE THERE'S A
LACK OF TRUST BY MANY NOT JUST
SOME AROUND THIS PROJECT IN THE
PRACTICAL JUDGMENT OF THE CITY
COUNCIL IN GENERAL, A FEW
EXAMPLES THAT AFFECTED MY TRUST
THE BEHIND THE SCENES
MANIPULATION OF CITY PARKLAND
STATISTICS TO EXCLUDE GOLF
COURSES WHICH RAISE POTENTIAL
ISSUES WHICH CAN BE DONE TO
GOLF COURSES WITHOUT A CITIZEN
.
IT'S CONCERNING.
SECONDLY, WHILE VIRTUALLY
EVERYBODY'S FOR THE CONCEPT
OF BIKE AND AND PEOPLE BEING
ABLE TO RIDE BIKES TO TO WORK
AND AND REDUCING
CARBON EMISSIONS ET CETERA, I
DON'T THINK EVERYBODY WAS
EXPECTING WHAT HAPPENED TO THE
CITY'S ROADS AROUND BIKE PATHS.
I THINK THAT'S SURPRISE.
AND LASTLY, THE FACT THAT
THERE'S REALLY LITTLE INTEREST
IN THE PAWS INITIATIVE, IT
BRINGS TO MIND THE CONCEPT
OF RAILROADING AND YOU SHOULD
TAKE SOME TIME I THINK TO
REBUILD TRUST IN THE COMMUNITY.
YOU SPEAK TO THE PLANT TO FOUR
DECISION MAKING TO BE MORE
DIVERSE AND TO HAVE MORE
DIVERSE INPUT.
THANK YOU.
I HOPE YOU TAKE ADVANTAGE OF IT
.
MY NAME IS BRENDA MILLER.
I LIVE IN THE FED.
>> CAN YOU CAN YOU BRING THE
MIKE DOWN TO EARTH?
SURE.
YEAH, I'M SURE IT'S A YEAH ME
TOO.
I LIVE IN THE THIRD WARD AND
FOUR YEARS SAW THE GIANT HOLE
WHERE THE OLD CODGERS AND OTHER
NEIGHBORHOOD STORES EXISTED
PRIOR ARE BEING DESTROYED FOR A
NEW APARTMENT COMPLEX.
THE GEORGE THE ORIGINAL
DEVELOPER WENT BANKRUPT GIVEN
THE CURRENT ECONOMIC
UNCERTAINTY AND WASHINGTON WILL
RESIDENTS OF ANN ARBOR BE
EXPOSED TO THE SAME MESS THAT
MY NEIGHBORHOOD ENDURED?
HOW MANY DEVELOPERS WILL GO
UNDER TARIFFS AND ALL THE OTHER
MESS FURTHER, HOW MUCH WILL THE
NEW INFRASTRUCTURE COST TO
ACCOMMODATE THE INCREASED
DENSITY?
ARE WE GOING TO BUILD A WATER
TREATMENT FACILITY?
CURRENT HOMEOWNERS ARE GOING TO
BE ASKED TO FOOT THE BILL,
AREN'T THEY?
PROPERTY TAXES ARE ALREADY
STEEP FOR RENTAL LANDLORDS SO
HOW CAN THEY NOT HAVE HIGH
RENTS IN ORDER TO MEET THE
PROPERTY TAX BURDEN THAT
DEFEATS THE AFFORDABLE HOUSING
RATIONALE.
>> THANK YOU
.
HI.
GOOD EVENING.
THE RESPONSE THING OF MY NAME
IS JEREMIAH.
I LIVE AT TWO EIGHT ZERO NINE
BRUCKMAN BOULEVARD.
FIRST LET'S BE CLEAR I THINK
THAT NO ONE HERE IS AGAINST
NEIGHBORS.
WE'VE KIND OF ESTABLISHED THAT
NOT EVEN AGAINST YOUR
NEIGHBORS.
SO I HAVEN'T.
THE COMMISSION AND COUNCIL MADE
A REAL EFFORT TO INCLUDE ALL
OF OUR NEIGHBORS IN PLANNING
AND OUR FUTURE COMPREHENSIVE
PLANNING REQUIRES MEANINGFUL,
ROBUST COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT
ACTIVELY REACHING RESIDENTS
WHERE THEY LIVE OPEN HOUSES AND
WORKSHOPS HAVE REACHED ONLY A
SMALL SEGMENT OF THE COMMUNITY
BY FAILING TO ENGAGE RESIDENTS
EARLY ON THROUGHOUT THE
PROCESS, OFFICIALS MAKE
CONSENSUS NEARLY IMPOSSIBLE.
EVEN TODAY A LARGE PERCENTAGE
OF YOUR NEIGHBORS DON'T KNOW
THAT MAJOR CHANGES TO THE LAND
USE MAP ARE UNDERWAY.
THEY DON'T KNOW THEIR ONE
STOREY RANCH MAY NOW BE NEXT TO
OR EVEN IN A TRANSITION ZONE OR
HUB.
THEY DON'T KNOW WHAT THAT MEANS
AND PLEASE DON'T CLAIM THE
PLANNED REASON ANYTHING THAT
ZONING COMES LATER THAT CLAIM
IS INACCURATE.
THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND
ZONING ARE LEGALLY CONNECTED
ZONING ORDINANCES MUST BE BASED
ON AND CONSISTENT WITH THE PLAN
.
MICHIGAN LAW REQUIRES THAT A
MASTER PLAN ALSO INCLUDE A
ZONING PLAN COVERING HEIGHT
AREA BULK LOCATION USE AND
SETBACKS.
THIS DRAFT IS STILL MISSING
THAT INFORMATION AND MORE
INCLUDING HOW WE WILL
PRIORITIZE AFFORDABLE MIDDLE
AND LOWER INCOME HOUSING AND
NOT CONTINUE TO BUILD EXPENSIVE
MARKET RATE DEVELOPMENT THAT
DOES NOT MEET OUR CURRENT REAL
NEEDS BY DECIDING NOT TO INFORM
AND ENGAGE OUR RESIDENTS AND
REFUSING TO PASS THE PLAN, THE
MESSAGE SEEMS CLEAR THE PLAN
CANNOT ACHIEVE WHAT RESIDENTS
WANT OR NEED.
YOU CAN STILL PAUSE FOR A
COMPREHENSIVE RESTART AND SINCE
I HAVE A LITTLE MORE TIME I DO
HAVE A QUESTION.
HOW DO YOU EXPECT TO CREATE AN
EQUITABLE INCLUSIVE PLAN
WITHOUT INCLUDING MORE OR MOST
OF THE RESIDENTS IN MAKING THE
PLAN?
>> THANK YOU
.
THANK YOU.
GOOD EVENING.
MY NAME IS JOHN GODFREY AND I
LIVE AT TWENTY EIGHT OR NINE.
BRUCKMAN THANK YOU FOR HAVING
ME AND I APPRECIATE YOUR
TOLERANCE WITH THE PASSIONS,
THE DIVERSE PASSIONS THAT BEEN
EXPRESSED AND SHARED WITH OVER
THE PREVIOUS WEEKS AND I KNOW
IT'S CAN BE TRAVAIL AND I
REALLY RESPECT YOUR TOLERANCE
FOR ALL THE VOICES THAT HAVE
BEEN RAISED HERE AND THAT
SHOULD BE RAISED AND I HOPE
THAT OTHER VOICES WILL BE
RAISED AS WELL.
>> CITIES ARE FRAGILE.
THE COMMUNITIES THAT MAKE
CITIES ALIVE, HOWEVER, ARE EVEN
MORE FRAGILE AND ARBER IS
INCREASINGLY UNAFFORDABLE FOR
WORKING AND MIDDLE CLASS
FAMILIES AND THE DRAFT PLAN
RISKS MAKING THIS WORSE,
ESPECIALLY IN THE CITIES MOST
VULNERABLE NEIGHBORHOODS.
EVEN THE HOUSING REPORT THAT'S
BURIED IN THE PLAN'S APPENDIX
ACKNOWLEDGES THIS TREND.
YET THE PLAN PRIORITIZES COSTLY
MARKET RATE HOUSING OVER
HOUSING ACCESSIBLE TO THOSE WHO
HAVE BEEN PRICED OUT.
AND YOU'VE HEARD FROM A NUMBER
OF THOSE AND THOSE WHO ARE MOST
EXPOSED TO GENTRIFICATION AND
YOU'VE HEARD FROM SEVERAL
OF THOSE THE PROPOSED
TRANSITION DISTRICT WHICH I
JUST WANT TO TALK ABOUT
BRIEFLY.
WE'LL CERTAINLY ACCELERATE THIS
TREND ESPECIALLY IN THE SOUTH
SIDE OF ANN ARBOR BY ALLOWING
DENSER TALLER BUILDINGS AND NEW
USES SUCH AS SHORT TERM RENTALS
AND INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY.
THIS WILL PROMOTE HIGHER COST
HOUSING, UNDERMINING THE
STABILITY AND UNDERMINE THE
STABILITY OF LOW AND MODERATE
INCOME NEIGHBORHOODS.
THE DISTRICT WILL EXTEND
THROUGH JUST THREE INSTANCES
PACARD TO SOUTH INDUSTRIAL
WHERE THIRTY NINE TO FORTY
SEVEN PERCENT OF HOUSEHOLDS ARE
LOW TO MODERATE INCOME
ACCORDING TO INCOME ACCORDING
TO THE US CENSUS MOST RECENT
SURVEY EAST OF ST. SCHOOL THE
NUMBER OF LOW TO MODERATE
INCOME HOUSEHOLDS CLIMBS TO
SIXTY THREE TO NINETY NINE
PERCENT DEPENDING ON THE CENSUS
TRACT PITTSFIELD VILLAGE AND
NEARBY AREAS ALONG PACARD 50 TO
60 PERCENT OF THOSE HOUSEHOLDS
ARE LOW TO MODERATE INCOME AND
WOULD BE SERIOUSLY AFFECTED BY
TRANSITION ZONES.
THESE ARE DIVERSE CLOSE KNIT
COMMUNITIES WHERE WORKING
FAMILIES ARE HOLDING ON.
THE PLAN ENCOURAGES AND ARBOR'S
A RACE TO AFFLUENCE AND MAKES
THEM A TARGET FOR SPECULATORS.
WE NEED REAL STRATEGIES NOW IN
THIS PLAN TO COUNTER
GENTRIFICATION IN THESE
NEIGHBORHOODS.
THIS MEANS SEVERAL SUGGESTIONS
PRIORITIZING PERMANENTLY
AFFORDABLE HOMES BY INVESTING
IN LAND TRUSTS, CO-OPS AND
NONPROFIT HOUSING NOW NOT IN
FOUR TO SIX YEARS AS THE PLAN
PROJECTS STRICTLY LIMITING
SHORT TERM RENTALS AND
TRANSITION DISTRICTS AND
REQUIRING BUFFERS FOR
INDUSTRIAL USES NEAR HOMES.
THIRD, CONSIDER ADOPTING A
COMMUNITY BENEFITS ORDINANCE
LIKE THE CITY OF DETROIT SO
RESIDENTS CAN NEGOTIATE REAL
BENEFITS WHEN DEVELOPERS THRUST
PROJECTS INTO NEIGHBORHOODS SO
THAT NEIGHBORHOODS CAN RECEIVE
BENEFITS FOR THEMSELVES GOING
FORWARD AND BARBER CAN STILL
CHOOSE EQUITY AND AFFORDABILITY
BUT ONLY IF THE PLAN AND
PROTECTS RESIDENTS AND THEIR
FRAGILE COMMUNITIES AT RISK
FROM DISPLACEMENT AS IT IS
WRITTEN DOES NOT OF THOSE
THINGS
GOOD EVENING SUGGESTS
THE WORD MIKE IF YOU CAN PLEASE
ADJUST THE MIKE TO YOUR SO
SORRY I JUST ADDED THAT IS
THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU.
HI GOOD EVENING RON LOVE 3RD
WARD.
MY IMPRESSION OF THIS PLAN IS
THAT IT WILL NOT INCREASE
AFFORDABILITY BUT IT WILL
UNLEASH MARKET FORCES TO ALLOW
GREATER GENTRIFICATION.
I WANT TO ADDRESS SOMETHING
THAT'S A VERY APPEALING CONCEPT
THAT'S BEEN THROWN AROUND AND I
THINK IS A FALLACY THE IDEA
THAT INCREASING HOUSING STOCK
IN ANN ARBOR WILL SOMEHOW LOWER
THE COST OF HOUSING IN ANN
ARBOR WHICH IS INTUITIVELY VERY
APPEALING IN MORE SUPPLY MEANS
LOWER PRICES.
THIS WOULD BE TRUE IF ANN ARBOR
WERE AN ISLAND WITH A FIXED
NUMBER OF PEOPLE AND A FIXED
FIXED HOUSING STOCK.
BUT ANN ARBOR IS PART OF A MUCH
LARGER METRO AREA AND APPEALS
TO PEOPLE WHO HAVE MONEY.
PEOPLE WANT TO LIVE HERE SO
INCREASING HOUSING STOCK IN ANN
ARBOR WILL HAVE A SMALL EFFECT
ON HOUSING STOCK IN THE ENTIRE
DETROIT METRO AREA AND IT MAY
REDUCE COSTS IN OTHER
COMMUNITIES LIKE REDFORD OR
OTHER PLACES OR SOUTHFIELD
WHERE SOME PEOPLE MOVE TO ANN
ARBOR FROM THOSE PLACES.
BUT IT'S UNLIKELY TO HAVE THAT
EFFECT IN ANN ARBOR AND ALL THE
BUILDING THAT WE'VE SEEN IN
DOWNTOWN HAS BEEN MARKET RATE,
VERY EXPENSIVE APARTMENTS AND
HASN'T ACTUALLY BEEN SHOWN TO
REDUCE COST TO THE EXTENT THAT
THIS PLAN TO THE EXTENT THE
FUNCTION OF GOVERNMENT TO SOME
DEGREE AND PLANNING AND ZONING
IS TO CONSTRAIN AND CHANNEL
MARKET FORCES, THIS PLAN SEEMS
TO JUST LIBERATE THEM TO DO
WHAT THEY WANT TO DO AND TAKES
THE NEIGHBORHOODS THAT ARE
CURRENTLY AFFORDABLE AND ALLOWS
THOSE TO BE TO BECOME A
WINDFALL FOR DEVELOPERS AND FOR
THOSE HOMEOWNERS WHO WANT TO OR
ARE COMPELLED TO SELL THEIR
HOUSES TO DEVELOPERS.
THERE'S A POTENTIAL VICIOUS
CYCLE WHERE HOMEOWNERS WOULD
POTENTIALLY BE OFFERED A LOT
MORE MONEY TO SELL THEIR HOUSE
FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF A MULTI
OF A MULTI UNIT DEVELOPMENT AND
THIS IS PARTICULARLY IN THE
NEIGHBORHOODS THAT ARE THE MORE
AFFORDABLE NEIGHBORHOODS OF ANN
ARBOR ONCE SOME HOMEOWNERS DO
THAT, THE HOMEOWNERS WHO REMAIN
IN SINGLE FAMILY HOMES WILL
HAVE POTENTIALLY QUITE TALL
BUILDINGS NEXT TO THEM AND
THEIR OWN USE VALUE OF THEIR
OWN HOME WOULD GO DOWN AS A
SINGLE FAMILY HOME OWNER WHICH
WOULDN'T SENT THEM TO ALSO
SELL.
SO THERE'S A POTENTIAL VICIOUS
CYCLE HERE.
THERE'S NO INDICATION THAT THE
INCREASED SUPPLY WOULD ACTUALLY
LOWER PRICES.
AN ANALOGY I'D LIKE TO USE IS
IF I TOOK A BUCKET AND STARTED
A FULL TUB OF WATER IN MY HOUSE
AND STARTED EMPTYING WATER FROM
THE TUB, THE LEVEL OF THE WATER
WOULD GO DOWN.
THAT'S ANALOGOUS TO PRICES
GOING DOWN ON AN ISLAND.
BUT IF I TOOK THAT SAME BUCKET
AND WENT TO PICK UP A LAKE OR
LAKE MICHIGAN AND STARTED
SCOOPING WATER OUT OF THE LAKE
WITH A BUCKET, IT WOULD HAVE A
NEGLIGIBLE IMPACT AND
INCREASING THE HOUSING PINEY
ANN ARBOR HAS TO BE CONSIDERED
OVER THE ENTIRE METRO AREA AND
THERE'S NO INDICATION THAT THAT
ANN ARBOR WOULDN'T SIMPLY
BECOME A GREATER CONCENTRATION
OF GENTRIFICATION AND THE LOWER
HOUSING COMES FROM INCREASED
SUPPLY WOULD OCCUR ELSEWHERE.
SO IN MY MIND IF YOU WANT
AFFORDABILITY YOU HAVE TO DO
SOMETHING THAT CONSTRAINS AND
CHANNELS MARKET FORCES AND
POTENTIALLY COME THROUGH WITH
THINGS THAT ARE ESSENTIALLY
ANTI MARKET AND REDISTRIBUTIVE.
THANK YOU
GURIEV GOOD EVENING.
GOOD EVENING.
MY NAME IS TRICIA HAKON AND I
LIVE IN CROSSING'S
CONDOMINIUMS.
THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN HAS BEEN
PROMULGATED AS AN AFFORDABLE
HOUSING PLAN YET SO FAR THE
AFFORDABLE ELEMENT APPEARS
AROUND TWO OR THREE PERCENT.
THAT'S A GUESS BUT I DON'T HAVE
ALL THE STUFF THAT'S BEFORE THE
EXISTING AFFORDABLE HOUSING AND
TRANSITION ZONES ARE
POTENTIALLY ELIMINATED SUCH AS
MY HOME IF PASSED, THE TSIPI
COULD ELIMINATE MORE AFFORDABLE
HOUSING THAN IT CREATES ONCE
ELIMINATED LIST PRICE WILL GIVE
RESIDENTS ONE FOURTH
OF REPLACEMENT COSTS, LEAVING
THEM NO OPTIONS ANN ARBOR AND
LIMITED OPTIONS IN THE AREA
WARD ONE WITH THE MEDIAN INCOME
OF EIGHTY ONE THOUSAND ALREADY
HAS FIVE HUNDRED AFFORDABLE
HOUSING UNITS ARROWOOD CO-OP
HUNDREDS OF ENTRY LEVEL HOMES
SIMILAR TO THE COMPREHENSIVE
PLANS FIFTY HOUSES AND FIFTY
YEARS PROJECT AND THE MOST
AFFORDABLE CONDOMINIUMS IN THE
CITY CROSSINGS YET IT IS RIGHT
STREET TO LONG CHARGE WHERE I
LIVE THAT IS DESIGNATED AS A
TRANSITION ZONE BECAUSE IT'S
PROFITABLE.
IN FACT TWO MILLION DOLLARS
MILLION CONDO PROJECTS ARE
ALREADY UNDERWAY RIGHT AT THE
END OF THE BLACK 90 PEOPLE LIVE
IN THE CROSSINGS THAT WOULD FIT
IN A FOUR TO FIVE INDIVIDUAL
HOUSES IN MY COURTYARD WE ENJOY
INDIA, CHINA, TAIWAN AND BRAZIL
AS NEIGHBORS I AM THE MINORITY
AT HOME AND ON THE NUMBER TWO
TWENTY BUS BEST NEIGHBORS EVER
AND I BURKLEY IT WANTS MORE
AFFORDABLE HOUSING FOR
TEACHERS.
SHE'S STANDING RIGHT IN FRONT
OF YOU ASKING FOR TANGIBLE
RESULTS FOR EXISTING AFFORDABLE
HOUSING.
SHE WANTS TO BELIEVE IN AN
ARBOR'S ADMINISTRATION BUT
THEIR ACTIONS TELEGRAPH FAIT
ACCOMPLI PRIORITIZE THE RICH
AND WELL-TO-DO OVER IN THE
MIDDLE CLASS.
THANK YOU
.
HELLO THERE.
HI.
I AM STACY HER TWO THOUSAND
FOUR CROSLAND AND IT'S REALLY
NICE TO BE HERE AGAIN TONIGHT.
I DO WANT TO THANK YOU ALL FOR
THE WORK YOU'RE DOING.
WE KNOW THAT YOU ARE HERE.
WE BELIEVE ME.
WE ALL KNOW THAT YOU ARE HERE
BECAUSE YOU CARE ABOUT THE CITY
AND WE CARE ABOUT THE CITY TOO.
I AGREE WITH MANY OF THE PEOPLE
WHO'VE EXPRESSED INTEREST IN
PASSING THE PLAN THAT THERE ARE
JUST A LOT OF THINGS THAT ARE
NOT COVERED , THAT ARE NOT
ADDRESSED, THAT ARE NOT FEELING
COMFORTABLE.
>> AT THE END OF THE DAY WE ARE
GOING TO GET TOWPATH THE END
OF THE DECADE OR TWO DECADES.
TWENTY FIVE YEARS WE'LL GET TO
A PATH WHERE THERE'S MORE
DENSITY IN ANN ARBOR.
THERE'S NO DOUBT IT'S GOING TO
HAPPEN.
MANY PEOPLE WANT THIS.
IT'S GOING TO HAPPEN BUT
THERE'S A COUPLE OF WAYS TO GET
THERE AND WE CAN BE THOUGHTFUL
AND CONSERVATIVE
AND CARE ABOUT
OUR CITY OR WE CAN DO A
CAREFREE WAY EITHER WAY WE'RE
GOING TO GET THERE BUT LET'S DO
IT IN A WAY THAT MAKES SENSE,
THAT PRESERVES THE THINGS THAT
MAKE IT ANN ARBOR, ANN ARBOR.
I REALLY, REALLY HOPE YOU'RE
LISTENING AND I REALLY BEG YOU
TO CONSIDER WHAT YOU'VE HEARD.
>> WE'RE GOING TO GET THERE BUT
THERE'S NO REASON TO PAUSE THE
PLAN AND TO MAKE SURE THAT WE
GET IT RIGHT.
PLEASE, I BEG YOU THANK YOU
.
MY NAME IS BRONWYN AND I LIVE
IN ONE OF THOSE TRANSITION
NEIGHBORHOODS AND I'M NOT GOING
TO SPEAK TO SPECIFIC ISSUES
BECAUSE THEY'VE BEEN SO
ELOQUENTLY EXPRESSED AND I AM
DEFINITELY ONE OF THOSE PEOPLE
WHO WOULD LIKE TO ADVOCATE THE
POSING OF THE PLAN TO GET MORE
INPUT FROM PEOPLE I HAVE A
LANGUAGE THAT I USE WHERE I
CALL A FUTURE THAT IS IMPOSED
ON PEOPLE WITHOUT HAVING THE
CHANCE TO REALLY GIVE THEIR
INPUT A FORCED FUTURE.
IT IS NOT A FUTURE OF CHOICE BY
THE MANY AND THAT MANY, MANY
PEOPLE IN THE CITY KNOW THAT
THE PLAN THAT IS CURRENTLY
BEING EXAMINED DOES NOT EXPRESS
WHAT THEY BELIEVE AND WHAT THEY
WANT AND THERE MAY BE MANY,
MANY, MANY MORE PEOPLE WHO
DON'T KNOW THE DETAILS OF WHAT
IS HAPPENING HERE BECAUSE THEIR
LIVES ARE SO BUSY AND INVOLVED
IN DOING WHAT THEIR PERSONAL
STUFF WORRY ABOUT MONEY,
WHATEVER IT IS THAT DOESN'T
ALLOW THEM TO DELVE DEEPLY INTO
THE WORKINGS OF THE CITY
COUNCIL AND THE PLANNING
COMMISSION ALL THESE OTHER
THINGS THAT HAVE SO MUCH IMPACT
ON OUR LIVES.
SO WHAT I WANT TO SPEAK TO AND
I'VE LIVED IN THIS CITY FOR
FIFTY YEARS AND I'VE COME TO
THIS PLACE AS A PLACE I'VE BEEN
HUMBLED BY LIVING HERE AND
DISCUSS RING THAT EVERYONE
NEEDS A VOICE.
>> WE NEED TO LISTEN
COURTEOUSLY TO THAT VOICE.
WE NEED TO KNOW THAT THE CHOICE
THAT WE ARE INVITED TO EXERCISE
IS A CHOICE THAT COMES FROM
VISION, THAT COMES FROM
COMPASSION THAT COMES FROM AN
AWARENESS THAT EACH PERSON HAS
A UNIQUE CONTRIBUTION.
I KNOW THIS SOUNDS UTOPIAN BUT
LET ME SEE IF I CAN FIND WHERE
I AM.
BUT TO ME IT WOULD AT LEAST
GIVE ME A MINUTE.
SO IT TAKES TIME.
IT TAKES ENERGY.
IT TAKES VISION.
BUT WHAT I SEE IN THESE TIMES
OF CHANGE IS THAT WE CAN ALLOW
A DIFFERENT VISION OF OUR
FUTURE AND REQUIRES CREATIVITY.
IT REQUIRES IMAGINATION.
IT REQUIRES VISION.
IT REQUIRES PASSION.
THERE'S PLENTY OF THAT'S
AVAILABLE.
SO I WANT TO SEE A PROCESS THAT
LOOKS TO A FUTURE POSSIBILITY
THAT WE HAVE NOT.
>> YES.
HELLO.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
>> GOOD EVENING.
PLANNING COMMISSION KIRK
WESTFALL CHARTER PLAYS THANK
YOU FOR YOUR HARD WORK.
FOR THE RECORD I'M THE
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
OF NEIGHBORHOOD INSTITUTE NOT
ON THE ORGANIZING COMMITTEE
OF THE EXCELLENT NEIGHBORS FOR
OUR NEIGHBORS ORGANIZATION
ALTHOUGH I DO OCCASIONALLY WEAR
THEIR T SHIRT I APPRECIATED THE
COMMENTS FROM EVERY ONE VIEW
THROUGHOUT THIS PROCESS.
EVEN IF I DON'T AGREE WITH ALL
OF THEM I FIND THEM ALL TO THE
PERSON TO BE THOUGHTFUL AND
THOUGHT PROVOKING.
I SUPPORT THE PLAN IN ITS
CURRENT DRAFT.
I THINK IT'S COME OUT IN A VERY
GOOD PLACE ALTHOUGH I DISAGREE
WITH THE FRAMING AND SPECIFIC
INPUT FROM CITY COUNCIL.
SOME OF THE DRY STUFF I
FORWARDED YOU SOME COMMENTS
EARLIER.
THE MAIN POINTS I WANTED TO
RAISE IT HAS TO DO WITH ONE
HUNDRED THIRTEEN THROUGH 115.
I'D ENCOURAGE YOU TO REMOVE THE
PHRASES CONSTRAINING TRANSITION
HIGH RISES TO BE ONLY NEXT TO
HUB HIGH RISES SHOULD BE
ALLOWED AWAY FROM LOW RISE
PERIOD ON PAGE ONE FOURTEEN AND
ONE FIFTEEN TRANSITION SHOULD
NOT SAY MEDIUM SCALE BUT RATHER
MEDIUM TO LARGE SCALE.
REGARDING THE MAP I DIDN'T
CROSS REFERENCE IT WITH THE
MULTIPLE CONVERSATIONS YOU HAD
ABOUT THE THE QUESTIONABLE
SITES THAT CAME AT THE END BUT
I DO SEEM TO RECALL THAT YOU
DECIDED THAT SOME OF THE
PARCELS ON THE EAST SIDE
OF PONTIAC TRAIL NEAR DVORIN
SHOULD BE TRANSITIONED.
I HOPE YOU'LL LOOK CLOSELY AT
THE MAP TONIGHT AND REGARDING
THE TIMELINE, I'D LOVE FOR
COMMISSIONERS TO SEEK SOME
CLARITY AT THE MEETING IF IF
YOU CAN APPROVE THE DRAFT
TONIGHT PENDING MINOR CHANGES
IN COUNCIL SENDS THE DRAFT UP
FOR REVIEW IN A COUPLE OF WEEKS
THE COMMENT PERIOD WOULD CLOSE
IN LATE DECEMBER AND CLEARLY
JANUARY IS A BETTER TIME FOR
HEARINGS BUT I HOPE YOU WON'T
PAUSE THE PLAN BEYOND THAT
UNLESS ABSOLUTELY NECESSARY.
I WANT TO RESPOND TO THE
COMMENT ABOUT THE DEMOLITION
OF SINGLE FAMILY HOMES FOR
EXPENSIVE EITHER BIGFOOTED,
SINGLE FAMILY DUPLEX OR
TRIPLETS.
THE ADDITION OF UNITS DOES TAKE
PRESSURE OFF THE CURRENT
HOUSING STOCK BUT I DO SHARE
THE CONCERN ABOUT OVERSIZE
UNITS AND ENCOURAGE THE ORACY
TO START WEIGHING POSSIBLE
ZONING SOLUTIONS LIKE MAXIMUM
UNIT SIZES.
I'D ALSO LIKE TO PUT YOU BACK
ON THE NOTION THAT CERTAIN
NEIGHBORHOODS SHOULD BE
PRESERVED BECAUSE THEY'RE
CURRENTLY MORE AFFORDABLE THAN
OTHER NEIGHBORHOODS.
THIS THIS RELATES TO THE
ARGUMENT IN FAVOR OF PRESERVING
NEIGHBORHOODS IN THE CURRENT
HISTORIC DISTRICTS OR HOUSE
MUSEUMS THAT WE HAVE.
WE CAN SEE HOW THIS PLAYS OUT.
YOU CAN LOOK AT THE SALES PRICE
OF UNINHABITABLE BUILDINGS
CLOSE TO DOWNTOWN OR START
LOOKING AT COASTAL COMMUNITIES
WHERE THERE'S MILLION TEAR
DOWNS BUT THERE WELL WELL
PRESERVED MORE HOMES LOWERS
RENTS AND SALES PRICES.
THERE'S NO SERIOUS ACADEMIC
DEBATE ON THIS.
IF YOU'D LIKE TO LOOK AT
PRIMARY RESEARCH AND PEER
REVIEWED STUDIES, JUST SEARCH
FOR HOUSING SUPPLY SKEPTICISM.
I'D LIKE TO POINT OUT THAT MANY
FORMER ELECTED OFFICIALS WERE
ELECTED WITH THE SUPPORT
OF WEALTHY LANDLORDS WHOSE
INTEREST IS IN CONSTRAINING THE
HOUSING SUPPLY.
>> THANK YOU FOR YOUR HARD WORK
.
>> THANK YOU
CAN YOU TILT TO TORTUE?
MY NAME IS KAREN ONEIL.
I LIVE IN THE BERN'S PARK AREA.
AS I UNDERSTAND IT THE PLANNING
COMMISSION WILL ACCEPT THE
THIRD AND FINAL DRAFT OF THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN TONIGHT AND
RECOMMEND IT TO CITY COUNCIL
FOR APPROVAL.
DUNDEE'S IN OTHER WORDS THIS
PLAN WAS CREATED AT GREAT
EXPENSE IN THE DARK OF NIGHT
WITHOUT PUBLIC INPUT OR EVEN
AWARENESS.
THE SUPPOSED PURPOSE OF A
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN IS TO
INCREASE AFFORDABLE HOUSING.
THIS IT DOES NOT DO.
THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN IS A
GIFT TO DEVELOPERS FROM OUT
OF TOWN WHO ARE NOT INTERESTED
IN CREATING AFFORDABLE HOUSING
BUT ARE INTERESTED IN CREATING
THEIR INCREASING THEIR PROFITS.
NO THOUGHT HAS BEEN GIVEN TO
THE REAL PROBLEM OF PROVIDING
INCREASED SEWER AND WATER
INFRASTRUCTURE TO SUPPORT
ENORMOUS INCREASE IN
POPULATION.
WHAT IS THE RUSH IN MOVING
FORWARD WITH THIS ILL CONCEIVED
PLAN YOU AS RESPONSIBLE CIVIC
LEADERS SHOULD BE IN THE
FOREFRONT OF PAUSING THE PLAN
UNTIL THESE MAJOR ISSUES ARE
ADDRESSED.
THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU
.
>> GOOD EVENING.
DANDRIGE THIRD WORD THANK YOU
FOR YOUR SERVICE.
UNFORTUNATELY I THINK YOU GUYS
ARE SNIFFIN ON FUMES WITH THIS
STUFF IF ENACTED THAT'S
PROPOSED FREE FORM REZONING
WOULD ENABLE THE REAL ESTATE
REAL ESTATE STRIP MINING OF ANN
ARBOR.
THAT'S WHAT I SEE THE WORLD
CRAZY.
THE WORLD IS CRAZY RIGHT NOW
INTERNATIONAL AND DOMESTIC
CAPITAL FLOWS EFFORTLESSLY TO
ANY OPPORTUNITY TO LEVERAGE A
LUCRATIVE RETURN ON INVESTMENT
.
INVESTING IN REAL ESTATE IS A
VERY ATTRACTIVE AND POPULAR
FORM OF MONEY LAUNDERING AND
NOW AT THIS PRECARIOUS LATIN
AMERICAN AND WORLD HISTORY, THE
ANN ARBOR CITY COUNCIL AND
PLANNING COMMISSION ARE
APPARENTLY IN FAVOR OF A
RADICAL REZONING EXPOSING
ARBOR'S NEIGHBORHOODS TO EVEN
MORE REAL STATE SPECULATION AND
MONEY LAUNDERING.
>> NOT THAT WOULD BE A TERRIBLE
THING.
I WANT AFFORDABLE HOUSING IN
ANN ARBOR.
I WANT ECONOMIC AND RACIAL
JUSTICE.
IT'S PROPOSED ZONING PLAN PAYS
LIP SERVICE TO THOSE VALUES BUT
DOES NOT TAKE ANY CONCRETE OR
REALITY BASED STEPS TO ENSURE
THEY BE ACTED UPON SIMPLY
REZONING AND INSPECTING,
EXPECTING INVESTORS WHO DO NOT
LIVE HERE TO IMPLEMENT OUR
VALUES APPARENTLY OUT OF THE
GOODNESS OF THEIR HEARTS
PROFOUNDLY MISUNDERSTANDS
AND
MISREPRESENTS HUMAN NATURE AND
THE FORCES AT WORK IN TODAY'S
WORLD TO PEOPLE AND SPECULATIVE
FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS BUY UP
HOUSES IN MY NEIGHBORHOOD AND
NEIGHBORHOOD IN ORDER TO
PROFITABLY FLIP THEM WILL NOT
CARE ABOUT IN ARBER THEY WILL
CARE ABOUT PROFIT AND THEY WILL
BE GUIDED BY PROFIT.
>> THE BIGGER THE BETTER AGAIN
IF ENACTED THIS PROPOSED
REZONING WOULD ENABLE REAL
ESTATE TO STRIP MINING OF ANN
ARBOR NEIGHBORS FROM NEIGHBORS
NEIGHBORS.
>> I ASK YOU TO DO THE RIGHT
THING BY OPPOSING THIS SHOCKING
AND PROFOUNDLY MOBERLY LAND
GRAB.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
GREG MONROE WARD FIVE
.
>> I'M ADVOCATING FOR TWO
THINGS THIS EVENING.
THE FIRST IS TO CAP HEIGHT IN
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS TO NO
MORE THAN ONE STOREY ABOVE
ADJACENT STRUCTURES TO RESPOND
TO RESIDENT CONCERNS ABOUT
ACCESS TO SUNLIGHT AND CANYON
EFFECT.
TODAY THREE STOREY STRUCTURES
CAN BE BUILT OUT OF SCALE WITH
THE NEIGHBORHOODS MADE UP
OF SINGLE FAMILY HOMES.
THIS PLAN WILL INCENTIVE THAT
AND SO CONSIDERATION SHOULD BE
GIVEN TO ENSURE INCREMENTAL
INCREASES IN DENSITY THAT ALIGN
WITH EXISTING NEIGHBORHOOD
SCALE TO THE RESIDENTIAL
DISTRICT ASCRIPTION.
SECOND, AS RESIDENTS HAVE
REQUESTED, PLEASE DESIGNATE
AREAS THAT ARE TODAY IN
PRACTICE RESIDENTIAL
NEIGHBORHOODS AS RESIDENTIAL
NOT TRANSITION DISTRICTS.
I'M FRUSTRATED BY WHAT FEELS
LIKE AN APPROACH THAT PUSHES
FOR MAXIMUMS WITHOUT
FLEXIBILITY, FAILS TO GRAPPLE
WITH NUANCE AND FEELS ON
RESPONSIVE TO THE CONCERNS
OF RESIDENTS.
I FEEL LIKE IT'S BEING DRIVEN
BY AN OVERESTIMATION OF WHAT
ZONING CAN ACCOMPLISH WITH
REGARD TO AFFORDABILITY.
DATA IS MIXED AND CONTACT
DEPENDENT.
SOME STUDIES SHOW IT DECREASES
COST OTHERS IT SHOWS IT
INCREASES.
ALL OF THEM HAVE CAVEATS.
WE'VE BEEN TOLD TODAY'S LUXURY
HOUSING IS TOMORROW'S
AFFORDABLE HOUSING BUT STUDIES
SHOW THAT FILTERING SLOWS AND
EVEN REVERSES IN HIGH DEMAND
AREAS.
FINALLY, IT APPEARS TO REQUIRE
A TREMENDOUS AMOUNT OF NEW
HOUSING THE EQUIVALENT
OF MAKING EVERY DAY AFFORDABLE
SATURDAY WITH CONGESTION AND
CROWDING TO GAIN MODEST AMOUNTS
OF PRICE RELIEF.
THAT DOESN'T SEEM LIKE A GOOD
TRAIT FOR US AND NO, THE IDEA
THAT IF WE SIMPLY BUILD MORE
HOUSING THAT CONTRAST WITH OUR
EXISTING STOCK COMMUTERS WILL
MOVE HERE IN DROVES AND STOP
DRIVING ALTOGETHER IS AN
UNVALIDATED ASSUMPTIONS FOR
THOSE WHO WANT TO WALK TO
GROCERY STORES.
LARGE APARTMENT DEVELOPMENTS IN
RECENT YEARS HAVE REPLACED
GROCERY STORES.
THE KROGER ON PACKARD IS NOW
THE GEORGE THE KROGER I GREW UP
WALKING TO IS NOW BEAKMAN ON
BROADWAY OVER INDEXING ON
MARKET RATE HOUSING WILL NOT
CREATE THE OUTCOMES WE DESIRE.
I'VE SEEN OUR FARMER'S MARKET A
VIBRANT PUBLIC SPACE BOXED IN
BY LUXURY DEVELOPMENT WHILE
GIVING ALMOST NOTHING BACK IN
TERMS OF STREET ACTIVATION
ALMOST NO RETAIL MOSTLY PARKING
GARAGE ENTRIES.
THAT IS A MISS.
OUR NATURAL FEATURES INVENTORY
HAS DECREASED WITHOUT ANY CITY
OVERSIGHT BY RIGHT ZONING
DEVELOPMENT IS RESPONSIBLE
STRENGTH ACRES OF WOODLAND,
HUNDREDS OF FEET OF STEEP
FRONTAGE ALONG SHORE DRIVE FOR
ONE POINT FIVE MILLION DOLLAR
CONDOS THAT IS NOT WIN.
THAT IS JUST ONE PITFALL OF MY
RIGHT ZONING OR THROUGH
OVERSIMPLIFICATION WE
RELINQUISH OUR ABILITY TO SHAPE
WHAT GETS BUILT IN OUR CITY
ZONING FOR THE MISSING MIDDLE
IS THE RIGHT THING TO DO.
I AM FOR MORE DUPLEXES AND
PERPLEXITIES IN OUR
NEIGHBORHOODS.
SHOULD WE DO OUR PART TO HELP
WITH THE NATIONAL HOUSING
CRISIS?
ABSOLUTELY.
WE CAN BUILD MORE HOUSING BUT
WE SHOULD REMAIN ORIENTED TO
OUR CURRENT RESIDENTS AND
MAINTAIN SOME SEMBLANCE
OF CONTROL IN WHAT HAPPENS TO
OUR COMMUNITY.
>> I AM ASKING FOR REASONABLE
COMPROMISE AND MODERATION.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
HE'S A REALLY TOUGH TUFFET.
THANK YOU.
MY NAME IS DONNA BABCOCK.
I'M FROM ONE EIGHT NINE ZERO UP
AND DRIVE IN THE FIRST WARD AND
I'VE SPOKEN TO YOU BEFORE ABOUT
MY LITTLE NEIGHBORHOOD.
IT'S A MIDDLE CLASS
NEIGHBORHOOD.
WE HAVE WE HOUSE TEACHERS,
NURSES, MEDICAL STAFF,
ENGINEERS, CLERKS, ARTISTS AND
CRAFTSMEN.
WE HAVE MULTIPLE GENERATIONS
LIVING IN A HOME AND ARE MULTI
GENERATIONS THAT HAVE LIVED ON
THE STREET AND ARE STILL THERE
.
OUR EXCUSE ME NEIGHBORHOOD IS
VERY DIVERSE ETHNICALLY AND
RACIALLY AND ALSO BY AGES WE
HAVE INFANTS AND TODDLERS
DURING THE DRAFT TO PROCESS ONE
OF MY NEIGHBORS AS THE
NEIGHBORS BECAME AWARE OF WHAT
WAS GOING ON THEY WERE VERY
UPSET BECAUSE THEY DIDN'T KNOW
ANYTHING ABOUT IT.
SO ONE OF THEM IN OUTRAGE WROTE
TO THE MAYOR AND THE MAYOR
PROMPTLY APPLIED AND SAID OH
YOU'RE YOUR NEIGHBORHOOD SHOULD
NEVER BE IN A TRANSITION ZONE
NEVER.
IT'S A TINY LITTLE NEIGHBORHOOD
BETWEEN TWO BIG HOUSING
COMPLEXES ACROSS FROM THE NORTH
CAMPUS.
AND SO WE WERE ASSURED THEN BY
THE MAYOR THAT WE WOULDN'T BE
AND NOW HERE WE ARE.
WE'RE STILL IN OUR INTERTRADE
TRANSITION ZONE LIKE YOU KNOW,
I GUESS IT DIDN'T MEAN ANYTHING
AND THAT IS A FLEXIBLE MIXED
USE CATEGORY THAT ACCOMMODATES
RESIDENTIAL COMMERCIAL.
>> I'M SORRY, MISS.
WE CAN'T HEAR YOU ANYMORE.
SORRY.
YEAH, THAT ACCOMMODATES
FLEXIBLE MIXED CATEGORY THAT
ACCOMMODATES RESIDENTIAL,
COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL
EMPLOYMENT AS IT SUPPORTS A
VARIETY OF BUILDING TYPES NEAR
TRANSIT TO ENHANCE WALKABILITY,
INCREASE TRANSIT USE AND
STRENGTHEN COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY
ALONG KEY CORRIDORS AND NODES.
WE'RE DEAD END STREET THE
DEAD ENDS INTO LESLIE PARK
WOODS.
>> WE SHOULDN'T BE TRANSITION.
>> SO I DO WANT TO THANK YOU
FOR WHAT YOU'VE DONE BUT I
REALLY DO BELIEVE THAT YOU'VE
NOT LISTENED TO THE CITIZENS
AND YOU'VE ALSO WE COME AND WE
JUST CLOSE TO YOU WHERE WE LIVE
AND WE TALK ABOUT GENERAL
GENERALIZATIONS BUT WE TALK
ABOUT OUR NEIGHBORHOODS AND
WE'VE NEVER ASK YOU TO DISCLOSE
WHERE YOU LIVE AND IF YOU'LL BE
AFFECTED BY THIS PLAN.
SO THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
I'M WENDY SHERMAN.
TWENTY THREE FORTY GEORGETOWN
BOULEVARD.
I'VE SERVED ON THE CBA AND I
WAS A MEMBER OF THE TWENTY
NINETEEN COMMITTEE THAT
INITIALLY RECOMMENDED THE
CONSULTANT FOR THIS PROJECT.
>> I SUPPORT THE PLAN BEING
BASED ON AFFORDABILITY,
SUSTAINABILITY AND EQUITY.
OUR COMMITTEE RECOMMENDED THAT
THESE TERMS BE CLEARLY DEFINED
IN THE PLAN.
THEY ARE NOT WE RECOMMENDED
CONDUCTING A SCIENTIFIC SURVEY
AMONG RESIDENTS OF ANN ARBOR
BUT LEONARD TOLD US THAT THIS
WOULD NOT BE DONE BECAUSE IT
WAS UNNI'S USSERY AND TOO
EXPENSIVE.
YOU COULD HAVE NOTIFIED ALL THE
PROPERTY OWNERS IN ANN ARBOR
BUT YOU DID NOT.
YOU COULD HAVE HELD DIALOGS
WITH THE NEIGHBORHOODS.
IN FACT, IT SEEMS YOU
DELIBERATELY EXCLUDED THEM FROM
THE CONVERSATION ALTHOUGH THE
PLAN DOES NOT DEFINE
AFFORDABILITY WHICH IT SHOULD
MANY PEOPLE THINK WILL LOWER
RENTS AND HOME PRICES NOT
LIKELY SUSTAINABILITY.
YOU COULD HAVE WORKED TO
PROTECT OUR TREES, OUR OPEN
SPACES AND OUR SIGNIFICANT
NATURAL AREAS WHICH ARE THE
CHARACTER OF OUR ENTIRE CITY.
BUT YOU HAVE NOT EQUIDAE WHY
HAVE YOU IMPACTED THE LOWEST
COST NEIGHBORHOODS WITH
TRANSITION ZONES?
I WOULD HOLD YOU I WANT YOU TO
HOLD DIALOGS WITH THE MOST
EFFECTIVE NEIGHBORHOODS.
THEY HAVE INFORMATION TO SHARE
WITH YOU BEFORE YOU DO PASS
THIS PLAN YOU SHOULD DO THAT.
THEY ARE THE KEY STAKEHOLDERS.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
HELLO MY NAME IS TAKEN JOHN I
LIVE IN WARD ONE.
I GREW UP IN ANN ARBOR.
I URGE YOU TO PAUSE THIS PLAN
BECAUSE IT SEEMS TO HAVE HAD
EXTREMELY LITTLE INPUT FROM THE
PEOPLE WHO WILL IMPACT THE
PEOPLE WHO LIVE IN THE CITY.
IT TOTALLY BAFFLES ME THAT THIS
COMMISSION ALONG WITH CITY
COUNCIL AS A WHOLE IS MOVING
FORWARD ON THE TRACK THAT IT
HAS BEEN ON AS IT CONTINUES TO
BECOME MORE AND MORE AFFORDABLE
AND LESS AND LESS LIKE THE TOWN
THAT SO MANY OF US FELL IN LOVE
WITH.
I COME TO THE BRIDGE TO GO UP
AND I DON'T THINK THAT THAT'S
THE CASE ANYMORE AND I THINK
THAT THIS PLAN THAT YOU GUYS
ARE PROPOSING WE ARE
CONSIDERING THAT ONE WOULD TURN
ANAMBRA INTO SOMETHING MUCH
MORE AKIN TO HOUSTON THAN THE
BOULDER THAT EVERYBODY HERE HAS
CLAIMED.
>> BUT IT IS SO LIKE FOR SO
LONG HOMEL COMMISSIONERS' SOME
SO MANY PEOPLE WHO WISH THAT WE
COULD LIVE HERE AND MORE THAN
THAT WE WISH THAT WE COULD LIVE
IN A CITY THAT IS PERSON MORE
ECLECTIC HAS BEAUTIFUL NATURAL
AREAS AND ACCESS TO VIBRANT AND
DIVERSE COMMUNITIES.
AND I HAVE WITNESSED THE KINDS
OF IMPACTS THAT THE
DEVELOPMENTS THAT THIS PLAN
WOULD HOPE IT WOULD GIVE WAY TO
MAKE ON THE COMMUNITY AND
THAT'S NONE OF THE ABOVE.
IT DESTROYS ALL OF THOSE THINGS
.
AND IF THE DEVELOPMENTS THE
BRIGHT DEVELOPMENTS THAT ARE
GOING IN A LONG, LONG SHORE
DRIVE ARE ANY INDICATION THIS
WILL BE AN EXTREME LOSS TO THE
QUALITIES
MAKE THIS CITY SO
WONDERFUL.
I WOULD LIKE TO SEE THIS
PLANNING COMMISSION AND THE
CITY GOVERNMENT AS A WHOLE
BRAVE AND BE INNOVATIVE WHEN IT
COMES TO FACING THE CHALLENGES
THAT WE ALL FACE AS A CITY AND
AS A MUCH BROADER NATION WHEN
WE LOOK MAKING PLANS RIGHT NOW
THAT WILL LEAD TO AFFORDABLE,
HABITABLE AND EQUITABLE CITIES
IN THE FUTURE.
I WOULD LIKE TO SEE HIM BECOME
A REGIONAL LEADER IN REGIONAL
TRANSIT THAT CONNECTS TO OTHER
CITIES ACROSS SOUTHEAST
MICHIGAN THAT ARE DESPERATE FOR
PEOPLE TO LIVE THERE.
WHEN I GO TO BATTLE CREEK, WHEN
I GO TO KALAMAZOO, WHEN I GO TO
FLINT I'M LIKE WHY IS AN URBAN
WORKING WITH THESE COMMUNITIES
TO SUPPORT DEVELOPMENT AND
SUPPORT PEOPLE MOVING THERE
BECAUSE THERE ARE A LOT
OF TOWNS THAT NEED A LOT MORE
PEOPLE TO LIVE THERE TO CREATE
A VIBRANT REGION WHICH IS WHAT
I THINK WE SHOULD BE FOCUSING
ON RATHER THAN LINING THE
POCKETS OF DEVELOPERS, WHICH IS
WHAT THIS PLANNING COMMISSION
AND GOVERNMENT SEEMS TO BE MOST
INTERESTED IN.
SO I URGE YOU TO LISTEN TO
FEEDBACK TO LISTEN TO THE
PEOPLE WHO WANT TO MAKE THIS
CITY AFFORDABLE AND
TRANSLATABLE FOR RESIDENTS HERE
AND ACROSS THE REGION AS
OPPOSED TO TURNING IT INTO
SOMETHING DISGUSTING.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
GOOD EVENING.
TOWN STALBERG ONE TWO ZERO TWO
TREVER IN THE HEART
OF LOWERTOWN ANN ARBOR FOR LESS
THAN NINE DOLLARS COMBINED REAM
OF PAPER TO PRINT OUT THIS PLAN
ON THAT REAM OF PAPER THAT
BLANK PAPER WON'T DO ANYTHING
TO HELP AFFORDABILITY
SUSTAINABILITY OR EQUITY.
UNFORTUNATELY NEITHER WILL THE
NINE HUNDRED THOUSAND DOLLAR
PLAN.
I'M A LANDLORD.
I'M A FORMER SUBDIVISION
DEVELOPER.
>> I'M A PROPERTY OWNER.
>> EVERYBODY IS EXACTLY CORRECT
ABOUT WHAT THIS PLAN WILL DO
FOR REAL ESTATE INTERESTS.
YOU ARE GOING TO MAKE ME MONEY
WITH THIS PLAN.
I'M NOT ASKING YOU TO AND I
DON'T FAVOR THIS PLAN BUT
THAT'S WHAT YOU'RE GOING TO DO.
THIS PLAN DOES NOT PROVIDE FOR
AFFORDABLE HOUSING.
IT ACTUALLY GOES THE OTHER
DIRECTION BECAUSE THE HOUSING
THAT WILL BE ADDED WILL BE
EXPENSIVE AND THE TEARDOWNS TO
MAKE THOSE EXPENSIVE HOUSING
WILL BE THE MORE MODERATE
PRICED HOUSING OF OUR CITY
WHICH WON'T HAVE ITS HOUSING
STOCK AT THE SUPPLY OF THE
MODERATE HOUSING STOCK WILL
DECREASE AND THAT WILL
ACCELERATE THE PRICE GROWTH IN
THE MODERATE HOUSING SEGMENTS.
WHAT WE'RE TRYING TO DO WE ARE
GOING TO GO BACKWARDS ON
WITHOUT THAT MODEST PRICED
HOUSING THAT THIS PLAN IS NOT
GOING TO DO ANYTHING FOR IN THE
SHORT TERM MID-TERM AND IF
WE'RE LUCKY MAYBE IT WOULD IN
THE LONG TERM BUT AT LEAST NOT
SHORT AND LONG MID-TERM THE
SUSTAINABILITY GOALS FAIL
BECAUSE WE'RE COUNTING ON
MASSIVE NUMBERS OF COMMUTERS
NOT BEING ABLE TO MOVE HERE.
>> BUT IF THEY CAN'T AFFORD TO
LIVE HERE, THEY CAN'T AFFORD TO
MOVE HERE.
THEY'RE STILL COMMUTING.
SO THE SUSTAINABILITY MAIN GOAL
IS LOST WITHOUT AFFORDABILITY.
WE NEED TO FOCUS ON
AFFORDABILITY EQUITY ISN'T
THERE WITHOUT AFFORDABILITY.
YOU WANT TO ADD SOME AMENITIES
IN OUR NEIGHBORHOODS THAT'S
GREAT.
BUT GUESS WHAT?
ONLY THE PEOPLE CAN AFFORD TO
LIVE THERE, GET THOSE AMENITIES
THAT'S NOT VERY EQUITABLE.
ONE THING THAT REALLY DISTURBS
ME ABOUT EQUITY AS SOMEBODY IN
THE REAL ESTATE BUSINESS WE'VE
BEEN TRAINED AND TAUGHT AND WE
KNOW THERE DEFINITELY IS
SYSTEMIC HISTORICAL SYSTEMIC
RACISM, DISCRIMINATION AND
HOUSING AND LENDING POLICIES
AND WHAT THAT DID WAS DENY
PEOPLE OPPORTUNITY FOR
ANDROGENIC RACIAL EQUITY
BUILDING THROUGH HOMEOWNERSHIP
AND GUESS WHAT THIS PLAN
DOESN'T DO ANYTHING FOR THEM
EXCEPT CALL THAT OUT.
THAT'S OFFENSIVE POSITIVE PLAN.
>> GET IT RIGHT YOU
.
>> HI MY NAME IS JULIE RHYDER.
I LIVE IN THE FIRST WARD AND
ADAM WHEREVER YOU ARE WE'VE
BEEN WORKING ON THIS FOR SIX
YEARS AND NOT TWO OR THREE PLUS
THE PLAN TO TAKE REALITY INTO
ACCOUNT MAKE SURE THE PLAN
RESULTS IN ITS STATED GOALS
OF AFFORDABLE, EQUITABLE,
SUSTAINABLE AND DYNAMIC ANN
ARBOR.
THE CURRENT PLAN WILL NOT IT
WILL NOT LEAD TO AFFORDABLE
HOUSING AT SCALE REFERENCE THE
ARTICLE I SENT YOU ALL IN
MINNEAPOLIS WHICH AFTER WHICH
ANTABUSE ENTIRE PLAN INCLUDING
NEIGHBORS FOR YOUR NEIGHBORS IS
ALMOST A CARBON COPY.
IT'S EXPERIENCED AN INCREASE IN
HOUSING BUT IT IS ALL MARKET
RATE NOT AFFORDABLE.
MINNEAPOLIS IS NOW CONSIDERING
SOCIAL HOUSING OR COMMUNITY AND
TRUSTS BLANKET UP ZONING DOES
NOT WORK.
WE ALL KNOW WE ALL KNOW THE
CITY WANTS AND NEEDS MORE MONEY
FOR THEIR SIGNIFICANT STAFFING
INCREASES AND LEGACY EXPENSES
FOR PROPERTY TAX REVENUES THAT
REZONING EVERY SQUARE INCH IN
TOWN BUT NO STUDY OR REPORT
SUPPORTS THE CLAIM.
A FORTY FIVE THOUSAND NEW
HOUSING UNITS BY 2050 BUT THERE
IS A WELL DOCUMENTED REPORT BY
THE ANN ARBOR AREA COMMUNITY
FOUNDATION STATING THE ENTIRE
COUNTY INCLUDING ANN ARBOR ONLY
NEEDS FIFTEEN THOUSAND NEW
UNITS IN THE NEXT 15 TO 20
YEARS AND THEY NEED TO BE
AFFORDABLE.
THE FOUNDATION FURTHER STATED
THAT THE TWO BEST THINGS THE
CITY CAN DO WOULD BE TO BUILD
AFFORDABLE HOUSING FOR SENIORS
WHO WOULD LIKE TO DOWNSIZE FROM
THEIR FAMILY HOMES BUT CANNOT
UNDER THE CURRENT CIRCUMSTANCES
THIS COULD FREE UP AS MANY AS
40000 EMPTY BEDROOMS IN
WASHTENAW COUNTY WHERE FAMILIES
ALL AT NEW TAX RATES.
THE SECOND STATEMENT BEWARE
OF OVERBUILDING UP ZONING THE
ENTIRE CITY IMMEDIATELY
INCREASES PROPERTY TAX REVENUE
BY RAISING TAX CATEGORIES AND
IT ALSO MAKES THE CITY
VULNERABLE TO SPECULATIVE REAL
ESTATE DEVELOPERS ON A SCALE
NOT SEEN OR IMAGINED BEFORE.
THERE IS NO MORE EXCLUSIONARY
PROPERTY IN A LUXURY HIGH RISE.
AS FOR SUSTAINABILITY, THE
SCALE OF CONSTRUCTION AND THE
ENERGY NEEDED TO MAINTAIN AND
OPERATE IT OBLITERATE THE GOAL
OF NET ZERO CITY LAND USE PLANS
ARE UPDATED EVERY TEN YEARS.
SCALE BACK THIS PLAN TO MATCH A
TEN YEAR TIME FRAME.
YOU DON'T NEED TO PLAN TO KILL
TWENTY 50 RIGHT SIZE THIS PLAN
FOR THE GOALS OF AFFORDABLE
SUSTAINABLE EQUITABLE AND
DYNAMIC AND ARBER THE THINGS WE
ALL WANT WE ALL WANT THAT THE
CURRENT PLAN WILL NOT ACHIEVE
IT.
THE CITY WANTS INCOME.
THERE MUST BE A WAY TO CRAFT A
PLAN ANSWERING THE HOPES AND
NEEDS OF ALL BUT THIS PLAN IS
NOT IT.
IF YOU
MY NAME IS KATHY BORRUS.
>> I LIVE AT ONE SEVEN SIX
CHARLETON IN WARD FIVE
CARBON SPACE CARBON SIETE WHERE
SIX WILL FIT SO SEVEN THIS IS
ONE OF MY FAVORITE SPANISH
SAYINGS.
I PICTURE PEOPLE SITTING AROUND
A DINNER TABLE SCOOCHING CLOSER
TOGETHER TO FIT IN ONE MORE
CHAIR FOR ONE MORE PERSON.
THE SCENARIO FOR ME BUT TO
IMAGINE THAT SIX OR SEVEN CAN
BE EXTRAPOLATED BY AN ORDER
OF A THOUSAND OR TEN THOUSAND
AND APPLIED TO OUR COMMUNITY IS
CRAZY.
>> I BELIEVE THAT THE DENSITY
ALLOWED THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
WILL RESULT ONLY IN MORE
HOUSING CHOICE FOR THE WEALTHY
.
DENSITY ALONE CANNOT SOLVE OUR
AFFORDABLE HOUSING CRISIS.
IT WILL BRING ONLY MORE HOUSING
FOR THE WEALTHY AND MORE
PROFITS FOR DEVELOPERS NOT HUH
NO.
COBIE ALLIEGRO PEOTONE.
>> THANK YOU
.
>> HELLO I'M MARY LOUISE.
I AM IN WARD ONE AT SIX THIRTY
FIVE SWITH STREET WHICH IS JUST
IN LOWERTOWN RIGHT BY SIX
CYCLES AND THE BEEKMAN AND THAT
AREA OF TOWN WE BORDER THE
HURON RIVER AND MY CONCERN IS
I'VE SPOKEN A NUMBER OF TIMES
TO YOU AND WE STILL ARE IN A
TRANSITION ZONE AND MY CONCERN
IS PROTECTING THE RIVERFRONT
AREA AND ALSO THE HISTORICAL
AREAS.
LOWERTOWN WAS INITIALLY LOWER
AND MIDDLE INCOME INDIVIDUALS.
YOU'RE RIGHT.
THEY WERE WE WERE THE
IMMIGRANTS.
WE WERE THE ONES THAT HAD THE
STOCKYARDS THE THE LUMBER YARDS
.
WE WORKED THE RAILROADS AND SO
TO SEE WHAT IS GOING TO BE AND
WHAT IS NOW WITH THE BEEKMAN
WITH A TRANSITIONAL ZONE, IT
WILL JUST BE THAT MUCH WORSE.
AND AS A RETIRED TEACHER MY
CONCERN IS FOR THE FUTURE.
IT'S ALWAYS A FUTURE BUT ALSO
IN MY CLASSROOM I DO WANT TO I
DO WANT TO JUST TAKE A MOMENT
AND THANK YOU, COMMISSIONER
MILLS, BECAUSE I'VE
BEEN
WATCHING ALL OF THE
COMMISSIONERS AND AS FAR AS I
KNOW WHAT WHAT HAVING
TECHNOLOGY IN THE CLASSROOM AND
HOW IT DIVERTS ATTENTION WITH
MY STUDENT MY PREVIOUS STUDENT.
BUT I ALSO WANT TO JUST THANK
YOU FOR YOUR DIRECTOR ATTENTION
WHEN WE HAVE OUR SPEAKERS
BECAUSE THE NUMBER ONE THING IS
I WANT TO BE IS HEARD WE WANT
TO HAVE OUR INPUT.
WE WANT TO HAVE A DIRECT IMPACT
IN THE COMMUNITY THAT WE THAT
I'VE LIVED IN FOR OVER SIXTY
FIVE YEARS AND MY FAMILY HAS
LIVED IN OVER ONE HUNDRED AND
FIFTY YEARS.
SO WHAT WE'RE TRYING TO ASK FOR
YOU IS TO TAKE A MOMENT BACK
PEDDLE PAUSE IF THAT'S THE
TERMINOLOGY.
BUT GIVE US A LITTLE BIT MORE
TIME TO IMPRESS UPON YOU HOW
IMPORTANT THIS PLAN IS THAT
THERE'S NOT THE RUSH.
IT DOESN'T HAVE TO HAPPEN TODAY
AND IT DOESN'T HAVE TO HAPPEN
TOMORROW.
WE WANT TO PROTECT OUR SMALLER
SUBDIVISION NEIGHBORHOODS.
IT'S NOT A SUBDIVISION DOWN ON
WRIGHT STREET, PONTIAC AND
TREVER AND OUR LOWER TOWN AREAS
.
THOSE ARE NEIGHBORHOODS.
THOSE ARE PEOPLE THAT WE'VE
KNOWN FOREVER AND TO HAVE A
TRANSITIONAL ZONE WE'LL TOTALLY
ANNIHILATE THAT NEIGHBORHOOD
FEEL I DON'T CARE ABOUT
INDIVIDUALS MOVING INTO OUR
COMMUNITY FOR TWO TO THREE
YEARS.
I AM CONCERNED ABOUT THE PEOPLE
THAT HAVE THAT CAN LIVE HERE
INDEFINITELY.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
I'M STRONG.
I LIVE I'M SIXTY SEVEN EAST
STATE BOULEVARD.
IT'S BEEN DESIGNATED AS A
TRANSITION ZONE WHICH I THINK
IS SIGNIFICANT TO THE SOCIAL
FABRIC THAT WE ALL LOOK FOR IN
THE NEIGHBORHOOD.
I DON'T LIKE THAT A LOT OF MY
NEIGHBORHOOD CHANGE BUT NO ONE
CARES ABOUT STADIUM BOULEVARD
EXCEPT FOOTBALL.
IT'S THERE IS NO PARKING STREET
,NO CURBSIDE PARKING BUT WE
WENT FROM THREE THREE TRAVEL
LANES ONE EAST TO WEST AND ONE
RETURNING TO TURN NOW TO OUR
DRIVEWAYS.
I HAVE FIVE WE HAVE BIKE LANES
IN ADDITION IT'S A VERY DENSE
STREET WITH NOT MUCH
OPPORTUNITY FOR SOCIAL
INTERACTION AND I THINK THAT
SOCIAL INTERACTION AND A DESIRE
TO MAKE FRIENDS TO USE CHILDREN
TO WALK TO WORK AS MANY PEOPLE
WHO WORK AT THE UNIVERSITY DORM
I THINK ALL OF THAT IS MISSING.
THERE IS NO HEART TO THIS PLAN
AND I JUST WANT TO LET YOU KNOW
THAT THERE IS SOMEBODY WHO
LIVES TRANSACTIONS A PROPOSED
TRANSITION.
THERE ARE LOTS OF US BUT WE CAN
HARDLY EVEN WAVE TO EACH OTHER
ACROSS THE STREET BECAUSE
OF THE DENSIFICATION THAT HAS
OCCURRED OVER THE YEARS THROUGH
ADDED LANES AND JUST THE
DIFFICULTY OF MOVING OF LIVING
IS STADIUM BOULEVARD WHICH WHEN
YOU DRIVE IN FROM THE EAST OR
THE WEST YOU SEE TREES.
THAT'S THE FIRST THING YOU SEE.
YOU DON'T SEE THE HOUSE BECAUSE
THERE ARE LOTS OF TREES, A
SIGNIFICANT NUMBER OF THEM AND
WE KNOW HOW IMPORTANT THAT IS
FOR SUSTAINABLE LIVING.
SO I JUST WANTED TO LET YOU
KNOW THERE IS SOMEBODY WHO'S
WILLING TO TALK ABOUT LIVING IN
A PROPOSED TRANSITION AND I'M
NOT HAPPY ABOUT IT AND I'M SURE
NOT MANY PEOPLE ARE IF THEY
EVEN KNOW WHAT IT MEANS.
>> THANK
HELLO.
>> PLANNING COMMISSION SHANNON
LOWE TWO EIGHT SEVEN ZERO
OAKDALE DRIVE.
I'M HERE IN SUPPORT OF THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
I FEEL LIKE I'VE SAID A FEW
THINGS BEFORE BUT I JUST GOING
BACK INTO WHAT EXCITES ME ABOUT
THIS PLAN I'M EXCITED THAT
AFTER WE GET THROUGH THE
PLANNING AND THE ZONING THAT
MAYBE SOME MORE HOMES CAN BE
BUILT THAT WE HAVE MORE
VARIETIES OF DIFFERENT SHAPES
AND SIZES.
I'M EXCITED THAT WE HAVE THIS
AFFORDABLE HOUSING VILLAGE AND
WE GET TO FUND IT EVEN MORE
WHEN WE BUILD MORE HOUSING.
WE ALSO SUPPORT MORE
AFFORDABILITY BY HAVING MORE
SUPPLY OVERALL I AM REALLY
EXCITED THAT WITH MORE PEOPLE
LIVING IN ANN ARBOR IT'S NOT A
QUESTION FOR PEOPLE IS TRANSIT
VIABLE?
IS THIS GOING TO WORK FOR ME
WHEN WE CAN ACTUALLY SUPPORT IT
TOGETHER?
I'M EXCITED THAT LOCAL
BUSINESSES DON'T NEED TO DECIDE
OR QUESTION AS HARD AS MY
BUSINESS IS GOING TO SURVIVE IN
THIS NEIGHBORHOOD BECAUSE THERE
IS DENSITY ALREADY TO SUPPORT
IT.
>> THANK YOU FOR ALL OF YOUR
WORK IN THIS.
IT'S BEEN A LONG PROCESS AND
THERE'S STILL MORE TO GO BUT
YOU'VE SPENT A LOT OF TIME
LISTENING TO ALL THESE
SUGGESTIONS AND ALL THESE
COMMENTS AND I APPRECIATE THAT
AND I HOPE THAT YOU FOR THE
COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE PLAN TO
CITY COUNCIL.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK GOOD EVENING.
PLANNING COMMISSION.
I THINK WE HAVE BEEN HAVING
SOME OF THESE CONVERSATIONS NOW
FOR UPWARDS OF SIX.
SO I'M ALWAYS CONFUSED.
YOU KNOW, JUST ME PERSONALLY
COMING TO MEETINGS FOR MORE
THAN SIX MONTHS THAT IS ASIDE
FROM OTHER EXTENSIVE WORK STUFF
THAT HAS GONE BACK TO TWENTY
NINETEEN.
AND SO I WANT TO TALK ABOUT THE
PLAN ANY MORE.
I WANT TO TALK ABOUT THE STUFF
THAT PEOPLE HAVE BEEN TALKING
ABOUT WHICH IS THE ZONING BUT
WE CAN'T GET TO THE ZONING
UNTIL THE PLAN IS DONE.
SO IF YOU WANT TO KNOW ABOUT
SETBACKS YOU WANT TO KNOW ABOUT
HEIGHT LIMITS, YOU WANT TO
THINK ABOUT FORM.
I'M ACTUALLY REALLY BUMMED THAT
WE GOT RID OF FORM BASED ZONING
.
WE NEED TO GET THERE.
SOME OF THE THINGS THAT PEOPLE
HAVE ASKED FOR HAPPENS IN THE
ZONING.
WE ARE SO FAR FROM A FAIT
COMPANY.
SOMEONE ACTUALLY SAID THAT I
HAD JUMPED THE SHIP IN MY
CREDIBILITY BECAUSE I SAID IT
WAS GOING TO TAKE US A WHILE TO
REZONE THE WHOLE CITY.
IT WAS NOT GOING TO HAPPEN IN
TWENTY TWENTY FIVE.
IT WASN'T GOING TO BE DONE IN
TWENTY TWENTY SIX AND I KNOW
THAT MANY OF YOU HAVE TRIED TO
COMMUNICATE THIS TO PEOPLE AND
I WOULD JUST ASK THAT YOU
CONTINUE TO DO SO AND THAT
PERHAPS TODAY WHEN YOU REPLY
YOU CAN MAKE SOME COMMENTS I
KNOW MANY OF YOU HAVE ALREADY
MADE ABOUT HOW YOU IMAGINE
TRANSITION TAPERING DOWN TO
RESIDENTIAL, HOW YOU ARE
THINKING ABOUT SOME OF THESE
TYPES AND WHY CERTAIN PARTS
OF THE CITY LONG TRANSIT
CORRIDORS AND I KNOW THIS IS
WRITTEN IN THE PLAN WERE CHOSEN
TO BE LABELED TRANSITION.
I UNDERSTAND IT'S VERY
FRUSTRATING TO SAY THE SAME
THING OVER AND OVER AGAIN AND
GET CALLED A LIAR, GET CALLED
CORRUPT, BE TOLD THAT YOU ARE
UNDER THE THRALL OF AN EVIL
TALL, SKINNY MAYOR.
BUT I ALSO KNOW THAT YOU'RE
WORKING REALLY HARD.
I'M NOT GOING TO SAY YOU'RE
WORKING REALLY HARD BUT YOU'RE
DOING IT WRONG.
BUT I'M GOING TO SAY AS YOU'RE
WORKING REALLY HARD AND I HOPE
THAT PEOPLE WILL LISTEN TO YOU
WHEN YOU EXPLAIN THOSE CHOICES
AND EXPLAIN WHAT HAPPENS NEXT
SO THAT THEY ONCE THEY KNOW THE
FACTS, NOT WHAT HAS BEEN TOLD
TO THEM BECAUSE THEY ARE
NEIGHBORS HAVE MISLED THEM BUT
THEY CAN KNOW THE FACTS AND
MOVE FORWARD WITH CONFIDENCE
THAT THE PROCESS DOESN'T END
TONIGHT DOESN'T END SIXTY THREE
DAYS DOESN'T END IN FEBRUARY OR
MARCH OF NEXT YEAR THAT IT'S
GOING TO BE ONGOING.
AND SO THE IDEA THAT THIS IS
RUSHED, THE IDEA THAT WE ARE
SPEEDING THROUGH THIS CANNOT BE
FURTHER THAN THE PROOF BY HOPE
THAT WE DON'T DRAG IT OUT
LONGER THAN IT NEEDS TO BE.
IT'S COLD OUTSIDE AND I DON'T
WANT TO BE HERE IN FEBRUARY AT
11:00 P.M. AT NIGHT IF I DON'T
HAVE TO BE.
>> THANK YOU ALL FOR YOUR HARD
WORK.
THANK YOU.
HELLO.
MY NAME IS HANNAH STANTON.
I LIVE AND WORK I'M A GRADUATE
STUDENT AND I AM ONE TWELFTH A
HOMEOWNER AND THAT MIGHT BE THE
CLOSEST I GET TO OWNING A HOME
HERE IN ANN ARBOR WITHOUT A
PLAN FOR HIGH DENSITY HOUSING
AND MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT.
I LIVE IN AN INDEPENDENTLY RUN
AFFORDABLE HOUSING CO-OP AND I
WANT TO TELL ABOUT IT THIS THIS
IS A CO-OP FROM MICHIGAN
GRADUATE STUDENTS.
IT'S A NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION
THAT OWNS THE HOUSE.
IT IS CALLED GAMMA ALPHA
SCIENTIFIC FRATERNITY AND WE
HAVE BEEN AT OUR CURRENT
LOCATION IN A SINGLE FAMILY
ZONE NEIGHBORHOOD SINCE
NINETEEN FIFTY.
WE'RE HIGHLY ORGANIZED AND
COLLABORATIVE.
ALL TWELVE RESIDENTS HAVE A
HOUSE JOB.
I SPENT FIVE HOURS DOING YARD
WORK THIS WEEKEND THE BOATING
COMMUNITY AN OPPORTUNITY TO
INVEST IN MY HOME HAS MADE MY
TIME IN ANN ARBOR MORE
MEANINGFUL AND RICHER IN EVERY
WAY AND BECAUSE OF THE LOW RENT
AND THE FACT THAT WE SHARE
RESOURCES WHICH INCLUDE PANTRY
STAPLES LIKE SWEET POTATOES,
FLOUR, ONION, SPICES AND BUTTER
THAT MEANS I AM LESS FOOD
INSECURE EVEN WHEN MY FOOD
BUDGET IS TIGHT.
BUT TODAY SPECIFICALLY I KNEW
THAT I COULD STRETCH MY ONE
HUNDRED DOLLAR MONTHLY BUDGET A
LITTLE FURTHER BECAUSE OUR
NEIGHBORS BROUGHT FOOD HERE
TODAY AND I INVITE ANYONE WHO
IS HUNGRY TO GO OVER THERE AND
ENJOY THAT FOOD.
THE CO-OP PLAN HAS THE
OPPORTUNITY TO SET THE STAGE
FOR ZONING THAT PRIORITIZES
UNIQUE AND AFFORDABLE LIVING
SITUATIONS LIKE MINE.
PLEASE MOVE FORWARD WITH THE
PLAN AND THANK YOU FOR YOUR
WORK.
>> THANK
CYBER BANANI, THIS IS
ALEX LOWE AND I BROUGHT SOME
CHEESE AND CRACKERS I'D LIKE TO
THANK THE PEOPLE WHO ARE
COMPLAINING ABOUT THE FOOD FOR
BRINGING THE WINE.
I LIVE IN PITTSVILLE VILLAGE,
ONE OF THE LOWEST INCOME AREAS
IN ANN ARBOR AND WE'RE
CURRENTLY UNDERGOING SOME
WONDERFUL INFRASTRUCTURE
IMPROVEMENTS AS PART OF THE
PITTSVILLE I VILLAGE
IMPROVEMENT PROJECT.
BUT I'M GOING TO DIGRESS
FOR A
MOMENT AND TELL A RANDOM STORY
ABOUT NAPOLEON SPECIFICALLY THE
BRITISH THOUGHT NAPOLEON WAS
SHOT BECAUSE HIS HEIGHT WAS
FIVE TWO BUT OF COURSE THAT WAS
IN FRENCH FEET WHEN CONVERTED
TO BRITISH FEET AND INCHES HE
WAS FIVE FOOT SEVEN TALLER THAN
THE AVERAGE PERSON AT THE TIME.
FUNNY HOW SO SO MANY THINGS
THAT PEOPLE BELIEVE TO BE
IMMUTABLE ARE ACTUALLY NOT
ANYWAY.
PREVIOUS CARRANZA'S SPOKE ABOUT
INFRASTRUCTURE AND GIVEN THAT
THE STORMS IN MARCH RESULTED IN
A SURPRISE INDORSE POOL IN MY
BASEMENT I'M UNDERSTANDING
OF THAT FACT.
SO I LOOKED IT UP.
AS IT TURNED OUT THERE ARE A
WHOLE SEPARATE COMPREHENSIVE
PLANS FOR STORM WATER, SANITARY
SEWERS AND WATER DISTRIBUTION
AVAILABLE AND ENGAGED TO
GUBJRG AND THEY EVEN HAVE
THEIR OWN PUBLIC COMMENT.
IT IS UNFORTUNATE THAT
BRANDOLINI IN HIS LAW PREVENTS
ME FROM RESPONDING TO THE FALSE
AND CONTRADICTORY CLAIMS
REPEATED BY A FEW FOLKS WHO
SEEM TO HAVE THE ONLY GOAL
OF MAKING A GREAT AGAIN BY
BUILDING ABSOLUTELY NOTHING
ANYWHERE NEAR ANYONE AND
CONTINUING THE MONEY PRINTING
MACHINES FOR SLUMLORDS AND
OTHER HOUSING HOARDERS.
BUT PLEASE REMEMBER IN 2020 OR
KAMALA HARRIS HIS PROGRESSIVE
AGENDA INCLUDED MANY OF THE
THINGS LISTED IN THIS
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND MANY
THINGS THAT ENABLES SUCH AS
EXPANDED PUBLIC TRANSIT DONALD
TRUMP'S CONSERVATIVE AGENDA
INCLUDED THINGS LIKE PRESERVING
EXCLUSIVE SIMPLEX ZONING,
ENVIRONMENTALLY HARMFUL SETBACK
LAWS AND MORE ENVIRONMENTALLY
DESTRUCTIVE AUTOMOBILE
DEPENDANCE.
SO LET'S BUILD AND ABOVE ALL
NOT JUST FOR THE WEALTHY ELITES
THAT MICHIGAN CONTINUES TO
SUBSIDIZE THROUGH PROPERTY.
LET'S NOT JUST BE NOT RACIST,
LET'S BE ANTI-RACIST.
LET'S BE ANTI CLASSIST.
LET'S OPPOSE ECONOMIC
SEGREGATION AND LET US BE THE
PROGRESSIVE AND THE VAST
MAJORITY OF US CLAIM TO BE.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
>> HI KAREN WHITE TWENTY SEVEN
NINETEEN CRANN BRUCKE THAT'S IN
A TRANSITIONAL ZONE YOU'VE
DRAWN YOUR MAP SO THAT HALF MY
NEIGHBORHOOD DISAPPEARS INTO A
TRANSITIONAL ZONE.
THANK YOU.
I WANT TO THANK COMMISSIONER
MILLS FOR ACTUALLY MAKING EYE
CONTACT YOU LADIES YOU'RE NOT
MAKING MUCH EYE CONTACT.
I REALLY APPRECIATE EVERYBODY'S
VIEWPOINT HERE TONIGHT.
I DISAGREE PROFOUNDLY WITH THE
LAST SPEAKER I WOULD POINT OUT
THAT THE COOK BROTHERS COOK
BROTHERS ARE THE ONES WHO ARE
PUSHING THIS LINE ABOUT SINGLE
FAMILY ZONING BEING
EXCLUSIONARY.
I WOULD POINT OUT THAT YOU ARE
GAMBLING WITH MY FAMILY'S
FUTURE WITH 25 YEARS
OF INVESTMENT IN THE SCHOOLS
AND IN THE CIVIC ORGANIZATIONS
IN THESE MEETINGS YOU ARE GOING
TO MAKE IT IMPOSSIBLE FOR US TO
STAY IN OUR HOME.
THAT'S ALL I HAVE TO SAY
OR
ELSE ANYONE IN CHAMBER WOULD
LIKE TO ADDRESS THE COMMISSION
.
>> MR. JOHN, YOU'VE ALREADY
SPOKEN.
IS IT IS THAT NOT ALLOWED TO
SPEAK AGAIN, YOU OR NOT?
>> NOT DURING THIS TIME.
THANK YOU THOUGH IF WE WANT TO
BE ANTIRACIST BUT NOW YOU KNOW
THAT THE ONLY JUSTICE WHITE MEN
ON THE BOARD REFUSE TO LOOK AT
ANYBODY GIVEN COMMENT I THINK
KIND OF WEIRD THAT WE DO HAVE
ONE HAND RAISED ONLINE, MR.
CHAIR FULLY ONE.
LET'S HEAR FROM THEM LIKE TO
MOVE TO MR. VASQUEZ YOU
PERMISSION TO ADDRESS THE
PLANNING COMMISSION FOR THREE
MINUTES?
YES.
THANK YOU.
GREETINGS.
CAN ANYBODY HEAR ME?
>> YOU CAN.
TERRIFIC.
THANK YOU.
LUIS VASQUEZ NINE ZERO NINE
BARTON DRIVE IN UPPER LOWER
TOWN LOWER TOWN WHICH HAS
STREET NAMES LIKE BROADWAY WALL
STREET, MAIDEN LANE AND CANAL
STREET.
DO YOU KNOW WHY THERE WERE
THOSE STREETS WERE NAMED THAT
WAY?
WELL, IT TURNS OUT THAT THE
FOUNDERS OF ANN ARBOR 200 YEARS
AGO IN AND MANY NEW YORK ON THE
HILL AROUND RIVER IMAGINE THAT
NOW GRANTED THE NEW YORK CITY
OF THE EARLY EIGHTEEN HUNDREDS
WAS YOU KNOW, IT DIDN'T HAVE
ALL THE HIGH RISES THAT IT HAS
NOW BUT THEY ENVISIONED A
DECENT ENVIRONMENT FULL
OF ACTIVITY, FULL OF LIFE, FULL
OF PEOPLE.
AND I THINK THAT WHAT WE NEED
TO DO IN NABIL IS TO ACCELERATE
THE PLAN.
PLEASE ACCELERATE THE PLAN.
PLEASE PUSH IT FORWARD TONIGHT
CITY COUNCIL SO THAT WE CAN GET
THIS DONE.
>> WE ARE STILL IN THE MIDST
OF A SEVERE HOUSING SHORTAGE
AND I WOULD JUST POINT TO THE
MOST RECENT EXAMPLE OF HOW ANN
ARBOR REITS REALLY FEEL ABOUT
THE PROSPECTS DEVELOPMENT AND
THAT IS THE VOTE THAT WAS JUST
TAKEN IN AUGUST FOR DEVELOPER
THE LIBRARY LOT BY IT BY A
MARGIN OF NEARLY TWO TO ONE
THAT SHOULD TELL YOU SOMETHING
THAT SHOULD TELL ALL MY
NEIGHBORS SOMETHING ABOUT HOW
ANN ARBOR AND ALLBRIGHT WANT TO
SEE THE CITY GROW AND TO BUILD
MORE AFFORDABLE HOUSING.
I'M I'M REALLY LIKING ALL THE
HIGH RISES THAT ARE GOING UP
DOWNTOWN.
I THINK THERE SHOULD BE MORE
OF THEM.
I THINK THEY SHOULD BE ALLOWED
TO BE TALLER AND I THINK THERE
NEEDS TO BE MORE DEVELOPMENT
WITHIN THE NEIGHBORHOODS TRI
PLEXUS, QUAD PLEXUS THREE AND
FOUR STORIES HIGH.
THOSE ARE MY PERSONAL FEELINGS.
BUT ONCE AGAIN PLEASE
ACCELERATE THE PLAN.
THANK YOU FOR ALL OF THE HARD
WORK THAT YOU'VE BEEN PUTTING
INTO THIS OVER THE PAST TWO
YEARS AND I'M NOT SURE WHERE
EVERYBODY WAS BUT CERTAINLY I
KNOW THAT I'VE BEEN INVITED TO
PARTICIPATE IN IN PUSHING
FORWARD YOUR BEST GUESS YOUR
TIME IS UP.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
THEY'RE THERE IS AN ADDITIONAL
HAND RAISED PHONE NUMBER ENDING
IN ONE NINE FOUR YOU PERMISSION
TO ADDRESS PLANNING PERMISSION
.
HELLO, THIS IS RITA MITCHELL.
I'M A MEMBER OF THE NEWLY
CONSTITUTED SUSTAINABILITY
COMMISSION AND I'M SPEAKING FOR
MYSELF TONIGHT.
MY CONCERNS FOCUS ON NATURAL
FEATURES IN PARTICULAR
RETAINING EXISTING TREES AND
VEGETATION THEIR PART AND AND
SUPPORT BIODIVERSITY WITHIN
COMPLEX ENTITIES OF WHICH WE
PEOPLE ARE PART I WANT THE
FUTURE OF IN ORDER TO PROVIDE
OPPORTUNITIES FOR EVERYONE WHO
LIVES OR VISITS HERE TO HAVE
DIRECT CONTACT WITH NATURE.
EVERY STREET AND PIECE
OF PROPERTY SHOULD HAVE TREES
AND VEGETATION THAT PROVIDE
HABITATS AND LINKS FOR
WILDLIFE.
I'M CONCERNED THAT THAT
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN IS
THREATENING TO MINIMIZE
SETBACKS AND REMOVE TREES AND
PLACE BUILDINGS ARE THAT WAY.
>> THAT'S A REAL CONCERN AS WE
MOVE FORWARD WHERE WILL PEOPLE
SEE BIRDS AND INSECTS THAT LAND
ON PLANTS AND MOVE AWAY AROUND
WITH THE WIND?
I WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT PEOPLE
UNDERSTAND AND FEEL NATURE SO
THAT THEY DO WANT TO PROTECT IT
IN THE FUTURE.
BOTH WITHIN THE CITY AND
OUTSIDE THE THREAD THAT
CONNECTS MONIKA COMMENTS
TONIGHT AND HAS BEEN FOR A LONG
TIME IS PROTECTION OF GREEN
SPACES BY COMPRESSING HOUSING
AND AVOIDING HOUSING OUTSIDE
THE CITY LIMITS I OBSERVED THAT
DEVELOPMENT IS BECOMING MORE
INTENSE OUTSIDE OF ANN ARBOR
REGARDLESS OF WHAT WE DO WITHIN
CITY LIMITS WE DON'T HAVE
CONTROL OVER TOWNSHIPS THAT ARE
ALREADY DENSIFYING MORE AND
MORE ALONG WITH ANN ARBOR WE
NEED TO WORK TOGETHER WITH THEM
AND WE NEED TO FIGURE THIS OUT
IN A BETTER WAY FOR NEXT YEAR
WE ARE GOING RIGHT NOW I WANT
TO CALL OUT THE LACK
OF CONVERSATION OUTREACH WITH
TRUE DIALOG AND EXCHANGE
OF IDEAS AND DEEP LISTENING
WITH THOUGHTFUL CONSIDERATION
OF ISSUES THAT ARE RAISED AND
RESPECTFUL WORK TOGETHER TO
ADDRESS ISSUES.
I FEEL LIKE THERE'S BEEN A ONE
WAY CONVERSATION NOT AN
EXCHANGE AND I JUST CRINGE
THINK MR. WESTFALL FOR
DISPLAYING HIS OPINION OF ONE
OF THE CHARACTERISTICS THAT
ATTRACTS MANY PEOPLE TO OUR
CITY AS DEMONSTRATED BY YEARS
OF OUR COVER SHEETS OF THE
OBSERVER.
WE DON'T SEE NEW TOWERS ON THAT
PUBLICATION.
WHAT OF PEOPLE TO US IS
HISTORIC DISTRICTS THAT ARE NOT
EQUAL TO HOUSE MUSEUM.
THAT'S REALLY DISRESPECTFUL AND
I'M SORRY TO HAVE HEARD HIS
OPINION AND I REALLY HOPE
THAT
AS WE MOVE FORWARD THAT ANOTHER
THING THAT WE DO THAT WE DON'T
HOUSE HISTORY MUSEUMS.
I'M HOPING THAT WE HAVE TREES
THAT WE BUILT WITH DAY TO DAY
AND THAT THEY ARE NOT JUST
CONFINED TO PARKS.
SO PLEASE LET'S WORK TOGETHER.
I ASK YOU TO PASS THE PLAN,
THINK GET THROUGH, DO STRONGER
OUTREACH AND BE COMPREHENSIVE
COMPREHENSIVE WITH THE OUTREACH
SO THAT YOU HAVE A SOLID WAY TO
MOVE FORWARD.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
WE HAVE ONE MORE HENDRY'S COULD
I ASK IF ANY OF OUR VIRTUAL
ATTENDEES RAISE THEIR HAND NOW
IF THEY INTEND TO SPEAK?
THANK YOU ERIC.
GIVEN YOU HAVE PERMISSION TO
ADDRESS THE PLANNING COMMISSION
.
GOOD EVENING.
I WOULD LIKE TO ECHO MANY
OTHERS REMARKS ABOUT THANKING
THE COMMISSION FOR ALL OF THEIR
HARD WORK AND FOR ALL THE
COMMITTEE MEMBERS WHO HAVE BEEN
PARTICIPATING IN THE PROCESS
FOR IN EXCESS OF TWO YEARS.
THIS HAS NOT BEEN A FAST
PROCESS HAS BEEN SLOW,
METHODICAL AND I THINK THE
AMAZING RESULTS HAVE SHOWN
THEMSELVES IN THE THIRD DRAFT
OF THE PLAN.
I WANT TO ECHO MR. VASQUEZ'S
COMMENTS A FEW CALLERS GO IN
SYNC WITH ACCELERATE THE PLAN.
THERE IS A HOUSING CRISIS SO
I'VE SEEN PEOPLE SHAKE THEIR
HEADS WHEN THAT'S BEEN
MENTIONED PREVIOUSLY BY OTHER
COMMENTERS AND THAT'S OBVIOUSLY
TRUE.
WE'VE HEARD TESTIMONIES FROM
PEOPLE TALKING BEFORE YOU IN
PREVIOUS MEETINGS ABOUT HOW
THEY STRUGGLE TO FIND A HOUSE
THAT THEY CAN AFFORD WITHIN THE
CITY.
I'D ALSO LIKE TO MENTION THAT
THE WOMAN WHO SPOKE BEFORE ME
ABOUT THREE PEOPLE AGO CAST
DOUBT ON WHETHER SINGLE FAMILY
HOUSING IS EXCLUSIONARY ZONING
AND IT MOST DEFINITELY IS THIS
WILL SINGLE FAMILY HOUSING WAS
CREATED IN BERKELEY
SPECIFICALLY TO KEEP CERTAIN
PEOPLE OUT OF CERTAIN
NEIGHBORHOODS AND WE'VE SEEN
THAT EFFECT IN A MODERN DAY ANN
ARBOR AS WELL.
>> IT'S ACHIEVED THAT RESULT BY
PEOPLE WITH LOWER INCOMES TEND
TO LIVE ON THE EDGES OF CITY
AND NOT INSIDE THE THE CLOSER
NEIGHBORHOODS AND BECAUSE
OF MANY PAST HISTORICAL
INJUSTICES AND SYSTEMIC RACISM
,INCOME AND WEALTH ARE
CORRELATED WITH RACE AND WE SEE
THE RACIAL DIVIDES AS WELL.
>> I LIVE IN THE THIRD WARD IN
THE NEIGHBORHOOD AND THERE'S NO
WAY THAT MY NEIGHBORHOOD
REPRESENTS THE THE DIVERSITY
OF THE CITY AS A WHOLE AND
THAT'S BY DESIGN THAT'S DUE TO
SINGLE FAMILY HOUSING AND
SINGLE FAMILY ZONING.
SO KEEP UP THE GOOD WORK.
LET'S ACCELERATE THE PROCESS
AND I LOOK FORWARD TO WHAT ANN
ARBOR HAS IN ITS FUTURE.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
>> I DO NOT SEE ANY OTHER HANDS
RAISED AT THIS TIME.
>> ALL RIGHT.
SEEING THAT WE SHALL CLOSE THE
PUBLIC HEARING THAT TAKES US TO
AGENDA ITEM NUMBER SEVEN
COMMUNICATION FROM
COMMISSIONERS.
IS THERE ANY WE'LL START WITH
COMMISSIONER MILLS AND THEN
WE'LL GO TO COUNCIL MEMBER DISH
.
THANKS.
AND I REALLY SINCERELY WANT TO
THANK EVERYONE WHO CAME OUT
TONIGHT AND GAVE YOUR TUESDAY
EVENING TO SHARE WHAT MAKES THE
ANN ARBOR SPECIAL TO YOU AND
YOUR VISION FOR THE FUTURE LIKE
LEGITIMATELY THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU FOR LISTENING
RESPECTIVELY RESPECTFULLY TO
OTHER PEOPLE'S COMMENTS AND I
MEAN I HOPE YOU SEE THAT THE
POSITION THAT WE ARE IN RIGHT
LIKE AN REALLY TRULY LISTENING
TO OTHER PEOPLE'S COMMENTS.
>> I ALSO WE ARE NOT DONE NO
MATTER WHAT HAPPENS HERE
TONIGHT.
>> THIS IS NOT DONE.
I WANT TO I I'VE BEEN MAKING A
HANDWRITTEN LIST OF THE
SPECIFIC EDITS THAT PEOPLE ARE
POINTING OUT.
THOSE THINGS ARE REALLY HELPFUL
FOR US.
>> SO OVERALL LIKE JEN ROLL
THINGS.
YES, PLEASE.
COMMENTARY REVIEWS BUT SPECIF
PAGES BUT THE MORE SPECIFIC YOU
CAN BE THE EASIER IT IS FOR ME
TO HELP SUGGEST EDITS.
>> SO I WANT TO THANK YOU FOR
THAT.
>> THERE WAS A QUESTION ABOUT
LIKE WHERE WE ARE MY HOUSE IS
IN A TRANSITION ZONE AND THAT
IS MY WHAT I CALL MY HOME.
>> I'M CURRENTLY A RENTER IN
ANN ARBOR WHILE I REMODEL THAT
HOUSE THAT IS IN A TRANSITION
ZONE WE'VE BEEN SAVING UP I
DON'T LIKE AND SO AND I'M NOT I
AM COMFORTABLE WITH THAT IN
PART BECAUSE I MEAN MAYBE IT'S
BECAUSE I SIT AT THIS TABLE SO
I HAVE A DIRECT VOTE ON SOME
THINGS THOUGH I CAN GET
OVERRULED AND SOMETIMES DO I'M
BUT I THINK IT'S BECAUSE SOME
OF THE LANGUAGE THAT WE HAVE
INCLUDED THROUGHOUT THE PLAN IS
SOMETHING THAT THAT WAS REALLY
IMPORTANT TO ME.
>> SO IT WAS QUESTION MOST
SPECIFICALLY AND I THINK THAT
THE WOMAN WHO ASKED ABOUT
WHAT'S ALLOWED IN TRANSITIONS
OWENS LEFT BUT I'M GOING TO SAY
IT IN CASE SHE COMES BACK AND
WATCHES THIS ONLINE IN THE
TABLE AND I'M LOOKING ON PAGE
ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTEEN
RESIDENTIAL COMMERCIAL OFFICE
INDUSTRIAL USES THAT DO NOT
CREATE NUISANCE OR HAZARDS AND
A PREFERENCE FOR ACTIVE FIRST
FLOOR ON ARTERIAL ROADS.
>> SO THOSE ARE THE SPECIFIC
USES.
BUT I THINK THAT THE TABLE ON
PAGE ONE TWELVE AND ONE
THIRTEEN IN PARTICULAR HELPED
LAYOUT KIND OF WHAT WHAT IS
IMAGINED IN EACH OF THOSE
DIFFERENT AREAS WHICH ARE NOT
REALLY ZONES BUT THAT IS REALLY
IMPORTANT FOR THOSE LIKE THIS
IS COUNTING ON THE ZONING PLAN
THAT WILL HELP US THINK ABOUT
THE NEXT STEP OF ZONING.
>> THE OTHER THING THAT I WOULD
JUST SAY IN TERMS OF COMFORT OR
WHY ONE OF THE FEATURES I THINK
THAT IS NOW IN DRAFT THREE THAT
I DON'T KNOW WAS IN DRAFT ONE
IS THINKING THROUGH SOMETHING
THAT GOT BROUGHT UP ABOUT WHO'S
WHO'S BENEFITING IS THIS REALLY
GOING TO HELP HOUSING?
>> AND I WENT BACK AND MADE
SURE THAT THIS WAS WHEN THIS
SCOUTS AND SO IF YOU WANT I WAS
ACTUALLY ON VACATION FOR THE
JUNE 17TH MEETING BUT I
FORWARDED COMMENTS FROM AN
EMAIL THAT I HAD RECEIVED TO MY
WORK THING BECAUSE I SIGNED UP
FOR THIS MOMENTUM TO BUILD
COMMUNITY IS THE LIST AND IT'S
ALL ABOUT THE TITLE OF THE
EMAIL IS HOW TO MAKE HOUSING
AFFORDABLE BEYOND BANDAIDS TO
REAL SOLUTIONS AND IN THIS IN
THIS COMMUNICATION THAT I
FORWARDED ON FOR CONSIDERATION,
THEY TALK ABOUT THREE PATHS.
THE FIRST PATH TO AFFORDABLE
HOUSING IS THE SUBSIDY ROUTE
AND THEY TALK ABOUT THAT'S WHAT
A LOT OF PEOPLE ARE THINKING
ABOUT AND KIND OF SOME OF THE
THE DRAWBACKS OF THAT OR NOT
RELYING ENTIRELY ON THAT.
>> THE SECOND PATH IN THIS
THING TITLED REMOVED BARRIERS
FOR BIG DEVELOPERS AND I HEAR A
LOT OF THAT RIGHT.
LIKE IS THIS JUST A WIN FOR BIG
DEVELOPERS?
>> ONE OF THE THINGS THE THIRD
PATH THAT THEY TALK IS THE
ABUNDANCE PATH, THE REAL
SOLUTION CREATING SYSTEMS THAT
SUPPORT BOTH LARGE SCALE
DEVELOPERS AND A SMALL ARMY
OF SMALL SCALE BUILDERS.
THE REASON I POINTED TO THIS IS
THAT I'VE BEEN AND I THINK I
NEED TO GO BACK AND DO YOU KNOW
ALL OF THE CONSIDERATIONS IT
REALLY TALKS ABOUT THINGS LIKE
SETTING MAXIMUM BUILDING SIZES
AS THE WAY THAT YOU GET THE
DUPLEXES AND TRY FLUXES THAT
YOU'RE LOOKING FOR.
IT WAS THE FIRST DIAGRAM BUT I
SAW ALONG WITH THE ZONING ABOUT
HOW WE CAN MAKE THIS WORK.
>> I WANT THIS TO BE AN
AFFORDABLE PLACE FOR MY KIDS TO
LIVE.
>> THEY ARE IN MIDDLE SCHOOL
AND ELEMENTARY SCHOOL NOW SO
LIKE GOODNESS ONLY KNOWS RIGHT
AND I KNOW THAT WE NEED TO
CREATE SPACES FOR THEM AND I
GOT TWO KIDS AND ONLY ONE HOUSE
THAT THEY CAN INHERIT SOMEDAY.
RIGHT.
SO LIKE I WANT TO MAKE SURE
THAT THEY CAN THAT THERE'S
SPACE AND SO I'M REALLY I'M
REALLY TRYING TO FIGURE OUT AND
I THINK ALL OF US ARE TRYING TO
FIGURE OUT LIKE HOW YOU DO THIS
,WHAT ARE THE PROTECTIONS?
YES, WE NEED WE BIG PROJECTS
AND THERE'S SPACE IN OUR IN OUR
IN OUR PLAN FOR BIG PROJECTS.
AND I ALSO THINK IN THE
RESIDENTIAL AREA IN PARTICULAR
LIKE I THINK THAT THERE ARE
WAYS THAT WE CAN DO THIS THAT
ALLOW FOR CREATING THAT MISSING
MIDDLE AND IF PEOPLE HAVEN'T
CHECKED OUT THAT DIAGRAM, I
ENCOURAGE YOU TO DO THAT.
THANK YOU AGAIN FOR ALL
EVERYONE COMING OUT.
THANK YOU, COMMISSIONER MILLS.
>> COUNCILMAN REDISH, I WANT TO
ECHO THOSE THANKS FOR EVERYONE
WHO CAME IN.
I WANT TO BE CLEAR THAT I AM
ALWAYS LISTENING.
I AM NOT ALWAYS LOOKING UP.
>> I AM OFTEN TAKING NOTES.
I AM OFTEN SCRABBLING THROUGH
MY NOTES TO FIGURE OUT HOW TO
RESPOND TO THE THINGS THAT YOU
ARE RAISING.
>> AND WHAT I HAVE HEARD IS
THAT YOU HAVE ALL SAID THAT YOU
CARE ABOUT HOUSING
AFFORDABILITY AND I BELIEVE YOU
I DON'T THINK THERE'S ANYONE IN
HERE SIMPLY EXPRESSING SELFISH
VISIONS OF THE FUTURE.
I THINK EVERYONE HERE CARES
ABOUT AFFORDABILITY.
EVERYONE HAS BEEN IT'S BEEN
VERY RECENT THAT EVERYTHING HAS
TOTALLY SKYROCKETED AND HAS
NEVER BEEN CHEAP BUT PRICES
HERE HAVE SKYROCKETED IN THE
LAST DECADE.
>> WE'VE ALL SEEN IT.
>> YOU CAN FEEL IT.
YOU CAN SEE IT AND WHO'S MOVING
IN AND WHO'S NOT MOVING IN.
MAYBE YOU HAVE CHILDREN WHO
CANNOT LIVE HERE.
WE ARE ALL SEEING THIS AND YOU
ALL CARE ABOUT THIS.
MANY OF YOU HAVE EXPRESSED THAT
THIS PLAN WILL NOT MAKE ANN
ARBOR MORE AFFORDABLE.
IT WILL SEND IT IN THE OTHER
DIRECTION AND I THINK ONE THING
THAT WE ALL NEED TO ACKNOWLEDGE
IS THAT NONE OF US HAS A
CRYSTAL BALL SO WE DO NOT KNOW
HOW ALL OF THESE REFORMS ARE
GOING TO AFFECT THIS CITY BUT
NOT HAVING A CRYSTAL BALL MEANS
THAT THE BEST WE CAN DO IS LOOK
AT
EVIDENCE AND THAT MEANS NOT
JUST SPEAKING FROM WHAT I FEAR
WILL HAPPEN OR WHAT SOMEONE HAS
PROMPTED ME TO THINK WILL
HAPPEN.
>> BUT TO LOOK AT STUDIES AND
EVIDENCE AND AND THEORIES AND
PROOF OF THEORIES AND SO I
WOULD LIKE TO I WOULD LIKE TO
TELL YOU BASED ON EVIDENCE
THERE IS TERRIFIC STUDY THAT
SUMMARIZED IN THE HOUSING
LITERATURE REVIEW WHICH IS PART
OF THE DATA APPENDIX.
>> IT'S BY MYERS AND PARK AND
THEY TELL YOU ONE THING THAT
THEY DIDN'T HAVE TO DO RESEARCH
TO FIND OUT WHICH IS THAT THE
SINGLE LARGEST SOURCE
OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING NOW IS
ACHIEVED THROUGH LOW INCOME TAX
CREDIT MONEYS IT USED TO BE
WHAT'S CALLED HUD MONEY HOUSING
AND URBAN URBAN DEVELOPMENT
THAT THOSE PROGRAMS ARE NOT IN
EXISTENCE.
>> ALL RIGHT.
SO EVERYTHING NOW IS DONE
THROUGH PURCHASING LOW INCOME
HOUSING TAX CREDITS AND THAT IS
HOW YOUR MILEAGE MONEY IS BEING
USED TO CREATE AFFORDABLE
HOUSING IN ANN ARBOR.
IT IS BEING LEVERAGED RIGHT
NOW.
I THINK WE CAN GET ABOUT FIVE
DOLLARS FOR EVERY ONE DOLLAR
WHICH IS GREAT.
>> IT'S NOT AS GOOD AS IT USED
TO BE BUT IT'S STILL GREAT.
>> THE SECOND LARGEST BY A LOT
THIS IS 75 PERCENT
OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING THAT GETS
CREATED AND HERE WE'RE TALKING
MISSING MIDDLE.
ALL RIGHT.
AND ALSO LOWER INCOME BUT IT'S
NOT INCOME QUALIFIED HAPPENS
WHEN HOUSING HAPPENS THROUGH
MARKET HOUSING, IT HAPPENS
THROUGH MARKET HOUSING THAT IS
OPEN TO EVERYONE AND THAT
BECOMES CHEAPER OVER TIME.
AND THIS IS A STUDY THIS IS NOT
A FACTUAL CLAIM BASED BASED ON
A FACTUAL STUDY.
>> SO FROM 2000 TO 2011, THIS
PROCESS OF HOUSING AGING OVER
TIME PROVIDED 75 PERCENT AS
MANY UNITS AS MANY AFFORDABLE
HOUSING UNITS AS DID TECH
FUNDING AND THEN AFTER 2011 THE
MARKET LOST SIX POINT EIGHT
MILLION AFFORDABLE HOUSING
UNITS.
WHY DID THAT HAPPEN?
BECAUSE IN 1970 IN THIS CITY
AND MANY OTHERS CITIES STOPPED
BUILDING AT SCALE IN 1970 THE
EFFECT OF MINIMUM LOT SIZE LAWS
THAT WERE ENACTED HERE LARGELY
IN THE 60S STARTED TO TAKE HOLD
AND A MINIMUM LOT SIZE LAW
RAISES THE PRICE OF THE HOUSING
THAT IS ON IT IN RESIDENTIAL
NEIGHBORHOODS BECAUSE IT SAYS
YOU NEED TO BE ABLE TO BUY THIS
MUCH LAND BEFORE YOU CAN BUILD
YOUR HOUSE AND YOU CAN BUILD A
LITTLE HOUSE, YOU CAN BUILD A
GIANT HOUSE BUT YOU'RE GOING TO
HAVE TO BUY THIS MUCH LAND NO
MATTER HOW MUCH HOUSE YOU CAN
ACTUALLY AFFORD.
THAT RAISES THE PRICE OF ENTRY
INTO HOME HOMEOWNERSHIP AND
THAT THAT RAISED COST THAT
DECREASED DIVERSITY IN THIS
CITY.
>> YOU CAN LOOK AT PAGE 236
OF THE PDF OF THIS PLAN
INCLUDING ITS APPENDIX
APPENDICES AND YOU WILL SEE A
GRAPH AND THAT GRAPH WHICH IS
ON PAGE 236 OF THE PDF OR PAGE
20 OF THE HOUSING APPENDIX NOT
THE LITERATURE REVIEW THE
APPENDIX YOU WILL SEE THAT
TODAY IN ANN ARBOR HOUSES
HOUSING BUILT THROUGH BETWEEN
1970 AND 2009 COST 20 PERCENT
LESS THAN HOUSING BUILT LATER
THAN THAT.
SO THAT'S THE EFFECT OF THAT
MECHANISM THAT WE ARE TALKING
ABOUT IN ANN ARBOR.
YOU CAN SEE IT IN ANN ARBOR NOW
WHAT DO WE DO TO GET THAT
MECHANISM WORKING AGAIN?
WE HAVE TO BUILD NOT BUILDING
IS NOT THE WAY TO GET IT BACK
WORKING AGAIN.
BUILDING IS THE ONLY WAY THAT
IS NOT THE ONLY WAY FOR US TO
GET AFFORDABLE HOUSING BUT IT
IS A WAY FOR US TO GET
AFFORDABLE HOUSING AND BUY
BUILD I MEAN BUILD THINGS THAT
ARE TALLER THAN THREE STORIES
AND THAT EXIST ALONG ROADS THAT
ARE WELL SERVED BY TRANSIT.
>> THAT IS HOW YOU DO IT.
>> SO IF YOU CARE ABOUT IT THIS
PLAN THE TRANSITION EXCUSE ME
THE TRANSITION ZONE IN THE HUB
ZONE ARE THE WAYS YOU DO IT.
AS FAR AS I KNOW THE RIGHT
STREET NEIGHBORHOOD IS
TRANSITION OR RESIDENTIAL
BECAUSE WE COULD NOT FIGURE OUT
WHICH TO MAKE IT.
>> SO IT'S ME THAT IS YOU
TRANSITION OR RESIDENTIAL AND
TRANSITION.
IT'S STUFF STARTS AT
RESIDENTIAL HEIGHTS SO YOU KNOW
YOU'RE NOT NECESSARILY GOING TO
GET ANY MORE HEIGHT THAN WHAT
YOU HAVE.
I NEED TO STOP THERE.
THERE'S MORE THAN I CAN.
THERE IS MORE THAT I COULD SAY
I WOULD LIKE TO SAY THAT ON
PAGE 160 THERE IS A DEFINITION
OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING.
THANK YOU.
COUNCIL MEMBER COMMISSIONER
WEATHERBEE AND THEN
COMMISSIONER ADAM SIMS.
>> SORRY.
>> GO AHEAD, COMMISSIONER.
BUT THERE WAS A QUESTION INTO
YOUR MIKE PLEASE WHERE WE LIVE
AND I JUST WANT TO GIVE A
LITTLE BACKGROUND OF MY
EXPERIENCE IN ANN ARBOR AND
WHERE I LIVE AND WHERE MY HOUSE
WOULD END UP IN THE NEW ZONING
PLAN.
>> SO MY PARENTS MET IN A
BOARDING HOUSE ON HILL STREET
RUN BY MY AUNT.
>> THEY GOT MARRIED, MOVED TO
HILL WHICH IS VERY CLOSE TO MY
HOUSE NOW.
THEY LIVED IN THE APARTMENTS
HILL FOR SEVERAL YEARS AND I
GREW UP IN ANN ARBOR.
>> I WENT TO I DID A DAYCARE ON
GLACIER WAY BEFORE IT WAS
GLACIER WAY AND WHEN IT WAS A
DIRT ROAD STILL I WENT TO
THURSTON GOT MOVED TO FREEMAN
SCHOOL WHICH IS NO LONGER IN
IT'S A IT'S NOT PART OF THE
SCHOOL SYSTEM ANYMORE.
CLAG HERE ON I THEN WENT WENT
AWAY TO SCHOOL.
I LIVED IN BOULDER.
I MET MY HUSBAND WHO GREW UP IN
BOULDER AND SO WE MY IN-LAWS
LIVE THERE SO I AM VERY
COMFORTABLE AND VERY KNOW A LOT
ABOUT BOULDER THEN MOVED TO
BOSTON AND THEN DECIDED I
REALLY LIKED ANN ARBOR AND WE
MOVED BACK HERE.
I'VE LIVED IN ANN ARBOR FOR
OVER 50 YEARS.
WE HAVE A HOUSE I LIVE ON MAIN
STREET.
>> IT IS IT WILL BE IN A
TRANSITION ZONE ONE BLOCK FROM
HOME.
SO IF THAT I DO NOT FEAR THAT
MY LIFE WILL BE UPENDED BECAUSE
IT IS CURRENTLY A MULTIFAMILY
RESIDENTIAL ZONE AND THERE ARE
APARTMENTS NEAR ME AND THE
PEOPLE ARE REALLY NICE.
THEY'RE MY NEIGHBORS.
IT'S NOT A BIG DEAL.
I LOOK OUT ON MY TREES, I LOOK
OUT ON HOUSES, I LOOK OUT ON
APARTMENTS.
IT'S FINE IT THE FIRST TIME WE
HAD A NEW APARTMENT BEING BUILT
I WAS REALLY WORRIED.
I THOUGHT WHAT'S GOING TO
HAPPEN TO MY HOUSE?
WHAT'S GOING TO HAPPEN TO ME?
HOW CAN I LIVE HERE?
AND IT TURNS OUT THAT IT DIDN'T
AFFECT ME AT ALL.
I MEAN THERE WERE A FEW MORE
DOGS IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD THAT
WAS KIND OF COOL.
WE WERE WALKING THEIR DOGS BUT
IT DID NOT AFFECT ME AND MY
PROPERTY AT ALL AND SO I DO
THAT'S THE PERSPECTIVE THAT I
COME FROM.
>> I DON'T I'M NOT TRYING TO
PUSH THIS ON SOMEBODY THAT I
WOULDN'T HAVE IN MY OWN LIFE.
I LIVE IT AND IT IS A LOVELY
LIFE.
I HAVE ACCESS TO TRANSIT.
>> I WALK PLACES.
I WALK HERE AND I LIVE IN A
SINGLE FAMILY HOUSE AND I'M NOT
PLANNING TO MOVE ANY TIME SOON
AS LONG AS WE CAN TAKE CARE
OF THE HOUSE.
>> BUT SHOULD MY NEIGHBORS MOVE
AND IT BECOMES REPLACED WITH AN
APARTMENT BUILDING THAT'S NOT A
PROBLEM LIKE I LIKE PEOPLE AND
I LIKE LIVING AROUND PEOPLE AND
I LIVE IN A CITY AND THAT'S THE
PERSPECTIVE THAT I BRING.
SO JUST YOU KNOW AND ANYBODY'S
WELCOME TO KNOCK ON MY HOUSE
THE DOOR TO MY HOUSE AND HAVE
SOME TEA OR SOME COOKIES.
I BAKE A LOT.
>> YOU KNOW, IF YOU'RE IF YOU
WANT TO SEE WHAT IT'S LIKE TO
LIVE IN A ZONE THAT'S
SURROUNDED BY HIGH DENSITY
HOUSING AND PROBABLY WILL HAVE
MORE IT'S IT'S NOT IS WHAT I
CAN SAY ALSO ALL I WAS LOOKING
AT HISTORIC DISTRICTS AND JUST
ONE THING THAT WE SOMEBODY
MENTIONED MINNEAPOLIS AND
BOULDER AND ANN ARBOR ALREADY
HAS MORE MORE BUILDINGS IN OUR
HISTORIC DISTRICTS THAN EITHER
MINNEAPOLIS OR BOULDER.
SO THAT'S JUST A REFERENCE
POINT AND SEE, I THINK THAT WAS
OH AND JUST FOOD ANYONE IS
WELCOME TO BRING FOOD AGAIN.
LIKE I SAID I I LIKE TO BAKE.
I'LL BRING FOOD.
SABIRA BREEA SOME OF YOU
REMEMBER WHO IS ON CITY COUNCIL
ALWAYS BROUGHT CHOCOLATES.
>> THAT WAS ALWAYS FUN AND I
REALLY APPRECIATE PEOPLE
BRINGING FOOD AND IF ANYONE
WANTS TO BRING FOOD WE COULD
HAVE JUST BUFFETS HERE.
I THINK THAT WOULD BE GREAT BUT
BUT THAT WAS JUST A COMMENT ON
THE FOOD ISSUE AND I THINK I'M
DONE.
>> THANK YOU COMMISSIONER.
WHETHER BE COMMISSIONER ADAMS
DANIEL ADAMS TEN SIXTEEN DANIEL
ST. WHEN I BOUGHT MY HOME IN
2012 MY NEIGHBORS TO MY NORTH
WERE MIDDLE INCOME RENTERS AND
MY NEIGHBORS TO THE SOUTH WERE
RENTERS
IN A DUPLEX AND THEY
ARE LONG GONE.
MY HOUSE HAS TRIPLED AND USED
TO BE A STARTER HOME AND IS NO
LONGER A STARTER.
THE RENTAL TO MY NORTH SOLD A
FEW YEARS AGO FOR A PRICE THAT
TEN YEARS PRIOR WOULD HAVE BEEN
ASTONISHING TO ANYBODY WHO
FOLLOWS THE REAL ESTATE MARKET
DISPLACEMENT AND HERE I MEAN
DISPLACEMENT IN THE FORM
OF PEOPLE WHO CANNOT AFFORD TO
RESIST IT IS OCCURRING ALL
AROUND US AND AND IN PARTICULAR
IN MY NEIGHBORHOOD.
IT'S BEEN GOING ON SINCE I
BOUGHT MY HOME AND PROBABLY
BEFORE THAT WE'VE HEARD A LOT
TONIGHT ABOUT HYPOTHETICAL
FUTURE DISPLACEMENT THAT MIGHT
HAPPEN UNDER A HYPOTHETICAL
FUTURE SET OF ZONING LAWS AND
I'M COGNIZANT OF THAT.
BUT IT'S HAPPENING AND I WANT
TO KNOW THAT IT'S HAPPENING IN
MY NEIGHBORHOOD AND IN MANY
NEIGHBORHOODS IN THE CITY NOW
MOSTLY UNCHECKED CONSTANTLY AND
IT'S IT'S DOING HARM TO PEOPLE.
THIS ISN'T THE I DON'T KNOW
WHAT TYPE OF DISPLACEMENT IS
BENEFICIAL.
THERE'S PROBABLY A VERSION
OF IT THAT'S NORMAL OR NATURAL.
BUT WHAT'S HAPPENING NOW IN
MANY NEIGHBORHOODS IS NOT THE
PEOPLE WHO ARE HARMED BY THAT
DISPLACEMENT CAN'T COME TO
THESE MEETINGS THAT MANY
OF THEM DON'T LIVE IN THE CITY
ANYMORE.
THE PEOPLE WHO ARE STRUGGLING
IN THE FACE OF THAT PRESSURE,
MANY OF THOSE PEOPLE CAN'T COME
TO THESE MEETINGS AND I WANT TO
NOTE THAT BUT THAT'S ALL A LONG
WAY OF SAYING THAT THE STATUS
QUO OF ZONING THAT MAKES
ILLEGAL OR PROHIBITIVELY
EXPENSIVE TO BUILD HOUSING IS
NOT STOPPING IN ANY WAY HARMFUL
CHANGE IT CERTAINLY ISN'T
WORKING FOR US.
THE BEDROCK OF THE PLAN I THINK
IS COMPOSED OF MANY COMPONENTS
BUT NOT LEAST OF THOSE
COMPONENTS IS THE LEGISLATIVE
DIRECTOR THAT WE HAVE TO MAKE
IT AND I'M QUOTING HERE FROM
OUR OUR THE RESOLUTION THAT
KICKED OFF THIS PROCESS TWO
YEARS AGO FOR TO MAKE
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR ADDING NEW
HOMES AND DENSIFICATION IN
SINGLE FAMILY ZONE AREAS AND IN
OTHER AREAS ZONING DISTRICTS.
THAT'S A POLICY JUDGMENT.
BUT AS COUNCIL MEMBER NOTED
EARLIER IN HER COMMENTS, THAT'S
GROUNDED IN A ROBUST AND
GROWING BODY OF PEER REVIEWED
RESEARCH AND THAT RESEARCH
HELPFULLY IS SUMMARIZED IN
DETAIL AND WITH CITATIONS IN
THE PLAN WE ASKED STAFF TO DO
THAT SO THAT YOU WOULD HAVE
ACCESS TO IT.
THERE'S AN APPENDIX AT THE END
OF THE DRAFT AND THAT RESEARCH
TEAM IN BRIEF THE FOLLOWING
PROPOSITIONS NEW CONSTRUCTION
DECREASES RENTS OR SLOWS THE
RATES OF RENTAL INCREASES IN
PROXIMITY TO THE CONSTRUCTION
OF THE CITY OVERALL STATED
DIFFERENTLY WHEN THE SUPPLY
OF AVAILABLE HOMES GOES DOWN
RELATIVE TO DEMAND PRICES TEND
TO INCREASE.
THAT'S A GENERAL STATEMENT BUT
THAT'S WELL SUPPORTED BY THE
RESEARCH THAT WE HAVE.
>> THERE ARE TWO MECHANISMS
FILTERING AND VACANCY CHAINS.
THOSE BOTH OPERATE WHEN YOU
BUILD EXPENSIVE MARKET RATE
UNITS THAT SEEM EXPENSIVE AND
OUT OF REACH AND SEEM TO BE
INCREASING THE PRICE OF A
COMMUNITY'S HOUSING STOCK OVER
TIME THEY DEPRECIATE AND TURN
ON TO THE MIDDLE MARKET STUFF
THAT WE ARE MISSING AND I HAVE
EXAMPLES HAVE CITED THEM IN
THESE MEETINGS OF BUILDINGS
THAT WHEN THEY RUN UP IN THE
SEVENTIES VANISHING FEW
BUILDINGS IN THE CITY THAT DID
GO UP MANY OF THOSE BUILDINGS
ARE NOW WHAT WE WOULD CALL MORE
AFFORDABLE, MORE MIDDLE INCOME
HOUSING BUT NOT REALLY BECAUSE
OF OUR HOUSING CRISIS.
BUT THEY'RE CERTAINLY CHEAPER.
WE ALSO KNOW THAT WHEN YOU
BUILD MARKET RATE HOUSING, THE
VACANCY CHAIN EFFECT OPENS UP
DOWNSTREAM OPPORTUNITIES FOR
PEOPLE AND GOING BACK TO MY OWN
EXPERIENCE AND ONE OF OUR
PUBLIC COMMENTERS ASKED US TO
TALK ABOUT HER EXPERIENCES.
I'M A HIGHLY PAID ATTORNEY.
I WANTED TO LIVE IN A WEALTHIER
NEIGHBORHOOD IN THE CITY AND
WHEN WE LOOKED AROUND WE WERE
WE DIDN'T HAVE A LOT OF OPTIONS
SO WE BROUGHT IN A TIER UNDER
THAT AT THE TIME AND WHAT WE
DID WAS WE TOOK A STARTER HOME
OFF THE MARKET AND WE WE'VE
TURNED AND WE'VE HELPED TURNED
OUR NEIGHBORHOOD INTO A HIGHER
INCOME NEIGHBORHOOD AND THAT'S
THE DYNAMIC THAT MORE SUPPLY
REVERSES OR AT LEAST HELPS TO
REVERSE.
IT'S GOING TO TAKE TIME.
THIRD, NEW HOUSING CONSTRUCTION
IS NOT A MATERIAL FACTOR IN
DISPLACEMENT AND IT'S OFFSET
YOU CAN OFFSET THAT
DISPLACEMENT THROUGH THE USE
OF SUBSIDIES WHICH WE ARE
ALREADY DOING AND ALREADY
PURSUING.
>> AND FINALLY ZONING REFORM BY
ITSELF DOES NOT CAUSE CHANGE TO
OCCUR.
ZONING REFORM IS NOT BY ITSELF
A SOLVABLE FOR AFFORDABILITY
AND I DON'T THINK ANYBODY IN
THIS PANEL THINKS THAT.
BUT QUOTING HERE FROM THE PLAN
WHILE LIFTING ZONING
CONSTRAINTS WILL NOT CAUSE
CITIES TO GROW, NOT LIFTING
THAT WILL ENSURE THAT THEY
CANNOT.
WE'RE TRYING TO REVERSE SOME
OF THAT WITH THE PLAN WHICH
WILL IN TURN CREATE ZONING
CHANGES LATER ON WITH RESPECT
TO OPPOSING THE PLAN.
THIS PROCESS HAS NOT BEEN
RUSHED PUBLIC MEETINGS ON THIS
INITIATIVE HAVE BEEN GOING ON
FOR OVER TWO YEARS.
THE DOCUMENT ITSELF HAS BEEN
DEBATED ACTIVELY AT THIS TABLE
SINCE JANUARY OF TWO THOUSAND
TWENTY FIVE.
THIS IS THE THIRD DRAFT.
I ENCOURAGE ANYONE WHO HAS
CONCERNS ABOUT THE EXTENT TO
WHICH PUBLIC COMMENT YOUR
COMMENTS HAVE SHAPED THE
MATERIAL PROVISIONS OF THIS
DOCUMENT TO GO REVIEW THOSE TWO
PARAGRAPHS WHICH ARE AVAILABLE
ON THE CITY'S WEBSITE PLUS THE
TWO COUNCIL RESOLUTIONS THAT
DIRECTED THIS BODY TO MAKE
SPECIFIC CHANGES TO THE
DOCUMENT IN RESPONSE TO YOUR
FEEDBACK.
THE THIRD DRAFT IS A VASTLY
DIFFERENT DOCUMENT AND THAT
REFLECTS LARGELY I WOULD ARGUE
NOT ALL IDEAS BUT AN ENORMOUS
AMOUNT OF STAFF AND CONSULTING
WORK AND FEEDBACK, PUBLIC
FEEDBACK, SINCERE, SUSTAINED
GOOD FAITH EFFORTS ON OUR PART
TO ACCOMMODATE THE DIFFERENT
VOICES IN OUR COMMUNITY WHO DO
HAVE DIFFERENT VIEWS ON WHAT
THE PLAN SHOULD SAY ABOUT THE
FUTURE OF THE CITY.
>> THE PLAN IS A COMPROMISE.
IT'S A BALANCE OF COMPETING
VALUES, COMPROMISES INEVITABLY
INVOLVE SOME PEOPLE BEING
DISAPPOINTED IN THE OUTCOME.
WE ARE NOT GOING TO AGREE ON
EVERYTHING AND THAT'S OK.
BUT SUGGESTIONS THAT A TWO YEAR
PUBLIC PROCESS HAS BEEN
SOMETHING OTHER THAN FULLY
TRANSPARENT AND PARTICIPATORY
THAT WE ARE RAILROADING THE
PUBLIC RAMMING THIS THROUGH ARE
FLATLY UNTRUE.
THE PROCESS OF ARRIVING AT THE
DRAFT THAT WE ARE CONSIDERING
TO SEND TO COUNCIL TONIGHT TO
START THE REVIEW PROCESS HAS
BEEN LONG, LONGER THAN I
EXPECTED IT WOULD TAKE I THINK
LONGER THAN OUR ORIGINAL
TIMELINE CONTEMPLATE THAT IT
WOULD TAKE IN THAT SENSE THE
PLAN HAS ALREADY BEEN PASSED AT
ADDITIONAL TIME I THINK WAS
WELL SPENT THE WAY WE STARTED
THIS SPRING WITH A GOOD
DOCUMENT.
I THINK WE'RE LOOKING AT A
GREAT DOCUMENT TONIGHT THAT
BALANCES VARIOUS COMMUNITY
INTERESTS AND THAT MAPS A
FUTURE THAT WILL HELP US MEET
OUR COMMUNITIES NEEDS MORE
FULLY, MORE EQUITABLY AND MORE
SLOWLY THAN WE CURRENTLY ARE.
I'M EXCITED TO SEND IT TO
COUNCIL TO START THE REVIEW
PROCESS.
I'LL BE VOTING TO DO THAT
TONIGHT THAT PROCESS DOESN'T
STOP THE PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT.
IT IS A IT'S A SIXTY THREE DAY
NOTICE AND COMMENT PERIOD.
SO IF YOU HAVE ADDITIONAL
THOUGHTS OR CONCERNS YOU SHOULD
CONTINUE TO EXPRESS THEM AND WE
WILL CONTINUE TO LISTEN.
THANK YOU, COMMISSIONER ADAMS.
>> COMMISSIONER NORTON
, I THINK
IT'S FAIR FOR FOLKS TO WANT TO
KNOW WE'RE PLANNING
COMMISSIONERS COMING FROM AND
WHAT OUR EXPERIENCES ARE YOU
SHOULD KNOW THAT THE PROCESS
THAT WE USE FOR ENGAGING IN
THESE CONVERSATIONS IS
STRUCTURED.
THEY'RE STRUCTURED SO THAT WE
DON'T GET INTO SHOUTING MATCHES
WITH FOLKS AND THAT IS USEFUL
SO THAT WE DON'T GET INTO
SHOUTING MATCHES.
BUT IT'S AWKWARD TO AND THAT'S
JUST A CHALLENGE THAT WE HAVE
TO WORK WITH.
I WANT FOLKS TO KNOW I AM NOT
PAYING ATTENTION TO IT.
>> I'M LOOKING AT ALL OF YOU.
I REALLY PROCESS INFORMATION
BEST WHEN I WRITE IT AS I'M
HEARING IT IT HELPS ME THINK
ABOUT IT AND LEARN IT AND
REMEMBER I'VE BEEN WRITING
NOTES FOR ALL OF THE MEETINGS
I'VE BEEN SITTING AND I'VE BEEN
LISTENING TO YOU AND I'VE BEEN
TRYING TO TAKE STOCK OF WHAT
EVERYBODY SAYING.
I HAVE TO SAY I'M A LITTLE BIT
OFFENDED THAT SOMEONE WHO
PROBABLY WOULD HAVE BEEN VERY
UPSET IF SHE HAD BEEN TYPECAST
OR CHARACTERIZED WAS
TYPECASTING ME AND
CHARACTERIZING ME A BIT
UNFAIRLY.
I THINK I'VE BEEN A LITTLE BIT
I'M A LITTLE BIT SHOCKED BY
SOME OF THE PERSONAL VITRIOL
THAT HAS BEEN FLUNG MEMBERS
OF THE PLANNING COMMISSION.
IT'S NOT FAIR.
IT'S UNFAIR.
WE'RE NOBODY UP HERE IS A TOOL
OF THE MAYOR.
NOBODY HERE IS A TOOL OF THE
GROWTH MACHINE.
WE'RE ALL UP HERE BECAUSE WE
CARE ABOUT THIS CITY TOO AND
WE'RE TRYING TO DO OUR BEST A
LITTLE BIT OF GRACE WOULD BE
NICE.
THANK YOU.
I'M REALLY SURPRISED THAT I'M
FEELING LIKE I HAVE TO DEFEND
MYSELF FOR THAT AFTER AFTER ALL
THE THINGS WE'VE BEEN GOING
FOR.
SO A LITTLE BIT OF GRACE
PLEASE.
I AGREE WITH MY FOLKS.
THE PLANE JUST BEFORE I STARTED
I MOVED TO ANN ARBOR IN 2001.
WE MOVED INTO THE DICKON
NEIGHBORHOOD.
IT'S ARE STRICTLY RESIDENTIAL
ARE ONE NEIGHBORHOOD I WALKED A
LOT BUT YOU COULDN'T REALLY
WALK ANYWHERE TO GET TO
ANYTHING IN THAT NEIGHBORHOOD.
WE HAD GOOD FRIENDS AND
NEIGHBORS BUT I DIDN'T REALLY
SEE VERY MANY FOLKS OUT AND
ABOUT MUCH WHEN I LIVED IN THAT
NEIGHBORHOOD ABOUT TEN TEN
YEARS AGO WE HAD THE GREAT GOOD
FORTUNE TO BE ABLE TO BUY A
HOME IN THE OLD WEST SIDE.
SO WE NOW LIVE ON THIRD STREET
SO I'M IN AN HISTORIC DISTRICT
AND I LOVE IT THERE.
I LOVE IT FOR TWO THINGS I LOVE
OLD HOMES.
I'LL DISAGREE WITH MY GOOD
FRIEND KIRK.
I WOULDN'T CHARACTERIZE THEM AS
HOUSE MUSEUMS.
I'LL PUSH BACK ON THAT A LITTLE
BIT TOO.
I TOTALLY AGREE THAT HISTORIC
DISTRICTS BRING SOME VALUE TO
THE COMMUNITY AND THERE'S
SOMETHING MEANINGFUL ABOUT THE
PLACES THAT WE'RE IN.
I'M ALSO VERY MINDFUL THAT MY
HISTORIC DISTRICT IS BECOMING
AN INCREDIBLY EXPENSIVE PLACE
TO LIVE.
IN FACT THE HOME VALUE WE
COULDN'T AFFORD TO BUY THE
HOUSE OR NOW IF WE TRIED TO BUY
IT NOW BECAUSE HOME VALUES ARE
GOING UP SO MUCH AND AT THE
SAME TIME THERE ARE MORE PEOPLE
I HAVE MORE IT'S AN ART TO
DISTRICT SO I HAVE MULTIPLE
FAMILY UNITS SURROUNDING ME AND
I KNOW MY NEIGHBORS IN THE OLD
WEST SIDE WAY BETTER THAN I
EVER KNEW MY NEIGHBORS IN THE
NEIGHBORHOOD.
THERE'S A LOT MORE WALKING THAT
GOES ALONG
THAT WE INTERACT
WITH OUR NEIGHBORS A LOT MORE
YOU CAN HAVE MULTI-FAMILY UNITS
AND OLD HISTORIC DISTRICTS AND
PEOPLE GET ALONG JUST FINE.
SO I UNDERSTAND THE FEARS THAT
PEOPLE ARE FEELING.
I WAS A LITTLE BIT NERVOUS WHEN
WE MOVED FROM THE NEIGHBORHOOD
INTO THE OLD WEST SIDE BECAUSE
I KNEW WE WERE GOING TO BE
MOVING NEXT TO RENTAL
APARTMENTS.
IT'S TURNED OUT TO BE FINE.
I'M TOTALLY UNDERSTAND FOLKS
FEARS ABOUT CHANGE AND WHAT
MIGHT BE COMING.
I UNDERSTAND AND YOU SIT AND
SHAKE YOUR HEAD.
>> NO, I CAN'T POSSIBLY REALLY
JUST COMMISSIONER I'M SORRY.
I JUST WANT TO YEAH.
CAN WE CAN WE SUSPEND SO THAT
WE CAN HEAR FROM THE
COMMISSIONER BECAUSE THERE ARE
OTHER COMMISSIONERS SO TO SPEAK
AS WELL THE COMMISSIONER OR I
DO HEAR YOU AND I UNDERSTAND
YOUR CONCERNS AND I'M ALSO
TRYING TO BALANCE ALL OF THE
CONCERNS WE'RE HEARING
OF EVERYBODY COMING IN AND
STANDING FOR US AND ALL OF THE
DIFFERENT PRESSURES WE'RE
FEELING IN THE SYSTEM AND AND I
WANT TO PUSH BACK AND SUGGEST
THAT JUST BECAUSE YOU DON'T
FEEL LIKE YOUR VOICE IS BEING
FULLY HEARD DOESN'T MEAN IT'S
IT'S A CORRUPT PROCESS.
WE'RE IN THE DIFFICULT POSITION
OF HAVING TO RECONCILE MULTIPLE
COMPETING VALUES, SOME OF WHICH
ARE JUST NOT COMPATIBLE WITH
EACH OTHER.
HOW DO WE DO THAT?
THAT'S THE STRUGGLE THAT WE'RE
FACING.
I AM CONCERNED ABOUT PRIVATE
INVESTORS AND THE KIND OF REAL
ESTATE SPECULATION THAT PEOPLE
ARE WORRIED ABOUT.
I HAVE TWO THOUGHTS ON THAT
ONE.
ONE IS EVER SINCE THERE HAS
BEEN NEW GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT
PEOPLE HAVE WORRIED ABOUT YOU
JUST SETTING UP THE GROUNDWORK
FOR DEVELOPERS TO COME IN AND
MAKE GOBS OF MONEY.
THAT'S ALL THIS IS ABOUT.
EVERYBODY IN THE CITY LIVES IN
A HOME THAT WAS BUILT BY A
DEVELOPER AND CHANCES WERE MOST
OF THE PEOPLE IN THIS CITY LIVE
IN HOMES THAT WERE BUILT BY
DEVELOPERS AND CHANCES ARE THE
FOLKS WHO LIVE THERE FIRST
WEREN'T TOO HAPPY WITH WHAT WAS
GOING ON NEXT DOOR TO THEM THAT
WAS BUILT.
SO WE HAVE TO KIND OF TAKE TAKE
THAT IN MIND AND THEN THE OTHER
POSITION IS MORE OF A LEGAL
POSITION WE BY LAW HAVE THE
AUTHORITY TO REGULATE, BUY, USE
WE CANNOT REGULATE BY OWNERSHIP
.
THAT'S THE LAW WE REGULATE BY
USE WE DON'T REGULATE BY
OWNERSHIP.
WE CAN'T SAY IF YOU'RE A
CERTAIN PERSON OR CERTAIN
INVESTOR YOU CAN'T COME HERE BY
HERE LEGALLY.
WE CAN'T DO THAT ALL WE CAN DO
IS REGULATE BY THE KINDS
OF LAND USES THAT ARE GOING
INTO THE BUILDING SO WE'RE
CONSTRAINED AND I'M CONCERNED
ABOUT THAT FACTOR.
I'M STRUGGLING A BIT MYSELF ON
HOW WE RECONCILE IT GIVEN WHAT
WE'RE ABLE TO DO LEGALLY AND
HOW THINGS WORK.
THESE ARE ALL THINGS THAT WE
ARE STRUGGLING WITH MIGHTILY
AND TRYING TO FIGURE OUT HOW TO
PROCEED AND GO THAT GO THE BEST
WAY FOR THAT WAS A LITTLE BIT
MORE OF A PERSONAL STATEMENT
AND I SET OUT TO MAKE I DO
APPRECIATE FOLKS COMING AND
TALKING TO US.
I WENT TO EVERY ONE OF THE
WORKSHOPS THAT WAS HELD, THE
PLANNING STAFF ADDED AND I
LISTENED TO EVERYBODY CLOSELY
AND I'M STILL STRUGGLING TO
FIGURE OUT HOW TO RECONCILE
SOME OF THESE THINGS.
WE CAN'T MAKE EVERYBODY HAPPY.
WE'RE DOING THE BEST WE CAN
PLEASE SOME GRACE.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
COMMISSIONER NORTEN
COMMISSIONER HAMMERSCHMIDT,
THANK YOU.
I REALLY APPRECIATE EVERYTHING
THAT MY FELLOW COMMISSIONER
SAID I THINK PROBABLY SAID IT
BETTER THAN I CAN BUT I WOULD
JUST LIKE TO ADD THAT SAYING
THAT THIS PLAN WAS NOT DONE
WITH ANY PUBLIC INPUT REALLY
DOES A DISSERVICE TO THE MANY,
MANY PEOPLE WHO PROVIDED INPUT
IN VARIOUS WAYS OVER THE PAST
ALMOST TWO YEARS.
>> WE ALSO HAVE HERE IN THIS
CHAMBER INCLUDING TONIGHT
LISTEN TO EXTENSIVE PUBLIC
COMMENTS SINCE MARCH AND WE
HAVE MADE CHANGES TO THE PLAN
BASED ON THOSE COMMENTS WE ARE
NEVER GOING TO HAVE 100 PERCENT
CONSENSUS AND THAT'S NOT THE
GOAL HERE AND IT DOES NOT MEAN
THAT WE'RE NOT LISTENING.
>> THE INTENT OF THE PLAN IS TO
BE A GUIDE FOR DEVELOPMENT
MOVING FORWARD AFTER THE MONTHS
OF PUBLIC COMMENT ON THIS PLAN.
I THINK IT'S CLEAR WE'RE NEVER
GOING TO HAVE FULL AGREEMENT ON
WHAT THAT DEVELOPMENT SHOULD
LOOK LIKE.
BUT I JUST WANT TO SAY I'M
REALLY GRATEFUL TO THE
CONSULTANTS, THE STAFF FOR
THEIR TREMENDOUSLY HARD WORK ON
THIS PLAN AND ALSO TO MY FELLOW
COMMISSIONERS AND THE PUBLIC
LIKE YOURSELVES WHO HAVE TAKEN
TIME TO TALK TO US ABOUT YOUR
THOUGHTS ON THE FUTURE OF ANN
ARBOR SCHREIBER'S I DON'T HAVE
A LOT TO ADD BECAUSE EVERYBODY
HAS SAID A LOT OF THE THINGS
THAT I WAS THINKING AND WERE
VERY ELOQUENT BUT I JUST WANTED
TO SHARE A COUPLE OF THINGS I
APPRECIATE EVERYBODY'S PERSONAL
STORIES.
I'M A LITTLE RELUCTANT BECAUSE
TO SHARE MINE BECAUSE MAYBE
SIMILAR TO COMMISSIONER NORTON
I FEEL A LITTLE UPSET THAT THAT
THE IMPLICATION IS THAT I STAND
TO PERSONALLY PROFIT FROM THIS
PLAN BASED ON WHERE I LIVE,
WHICH FEELS PRETTY NASTY THING
TO TO BUY.
BUT SO I'LL JUST SAY I LIVE IN
AN R ONE C NEIGHBORHOOD
OF CLOSE TO W STADIUM BOULEVARD
AND I DON'T STAND TO PERSONALLY
PROFIT FROM THIS PLAN.
THE OTHER THING IS I HAVE A
KIND OF DRY BUT I JUST WANT TO
REALLY CORRECT THE RECORD.
SO IN SOME OF THE WRITTEN
COMMUNICATION WE'VE GOTTEN IN
SOME OF THE COMMENTS THIS
EVENING, PEOPLE ARE TALKING
ABOUT A LOT LINE TO LOT LINE
DEVELOPMENT RESIDENTIAL
NEIGHBORHOODS THERE IS NO
THERE'S NOTHING IN HERE WHICH
INDICATES THAT THIS BODY OR THE
PLAN AS A GUIDELINE A DESIRE TO
MOVE TOWARDS ZERO SETBACKS IN
RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOODS AND
WE'RE NOT NOT TALKING ABOUT
SETBACKS IN THE PLAN TO BE
SHADY.
THAT'S ACTUALLY NOT THE
APPROPRIATE PLACE TO DEFINE
THOSE THINGS THAT WILL HAPPEN
IN IMPLEMENTATION.
THERE'S NO INTENTION TO HAVE
ZERO SETBACKS IN RESIDENTIAL
NEIGHBORHOODS.
I ALSO HEARD SOMETHING ABOUT
SETTING LIMITS AND AGAIN THAT'S
SOMETHING WHICH WILL IS MORE
APPROPRIATELY DONE WHEN WE ARE
IN IMPLEMENTATION BUT THAT WILL
BE A VERY ROBUST DEBATE AROUND
HEIGHT LIMITS FOR TRIPLEX IS
DUPLEXES, ET CETERA OR REALLY
EVERY NEW ZONING CATEGORY WHEN
WE WHEN WE GET THERE.
AND THEN I ALSO JUST WANT TO
REMIND EVERYBODY THAT EVEN
THOUGH YOU'RE WHERE YOU LIVE ON
ON THE FUTURE LAND USE NOT MY
CURRENTLY SHOW TRANSITION THAT
DOES NOT MEAN THAT THERE'S
GOING TO BE A 10 STOREY
BUILDING NEXT OR THAT YOUR
HOUSE IS GOING TO GET BULLDOZED
TOMORROW.
IT JUST MEANS THAT LIKE IF YOU
READ THE THE WHEN THE PLAN
PARTICULARLY IF YOU GO TO THE
CHART ON PAGE 112 OR 113 WHICH
KIND OF LAYS OUT ALL THESE
FUTURE LAND USE CATEGORIES, IT
SAYS CONTEXT SENSITIVE HEIGHT
LOWER SMALLER ADJACENT TO
RESIDENTIAL.
WE HAVE ALWAYS TALKED ABOUT
THAT ZONING THAT ZONING
DISTRICT AS ONE WHICH WOULD BE
WHICH WOULD PAY ATTENTION TO
WHAT IT'S ADJACENT TO AND WOULD
ADJUST HAVE HEIGHT LIMITS BASED
ON ITS ADJACENCY OR RESIDENTIAL
NEIGHBORHOODS.
SO I JUST REALLY WANT TO REMIND
PEOPLE THAT BECAUSE I THINK
THAT THERE'S A FEAR WHICH IS
COMING FROM SOME MISINFORMATION
WHICH IS BEING SPREAD AND THEN
I ALSO JUST WILL ECHO GRATITUDE
AND APPRECIATION FOR EVERYBODY
WHO COMES OUT AND SPEAKS TO US
WHETHER YOU AGREE WITH THE PLAN
OR DON'T AGREE WITH THE PLAN OR
SUPERCRITICAL OR FEELING
PASSIONATE AND ANGRY OR FEELING
COMPLIMENTARY, IT DOESN'T
REALLY MATTER THAT THIS KIND
OF LEVEL OF ENGAGEMENT IS GREAT
AND AND WE WELCOME IT.
>> WE ARE NOT RESISTANT TO IT
AT ALL.
WE WANTED THINGS.
THANK YOU.
I WANTED TO JUST PIGGYBACK OFF
OF COMMISSIONER MILLS COMMENT
AROUND THE INDUSTRIAL I THINK
THE SPEAKER'S NAME WAS JANICE
ROGERS WHO CAME TO ASK ABOUT
WHAT WAS GOING TO HAPPEN.
>> I'M SORRY JAMIE.
THAT WOULD EXPLAIN WHY IT LOOKS
LIKE JAMIE ON MY NOTES AND I
WAS TRYING IT ACTUALLY LOOKS
LIKE JAMES AND I WAS LIKE IT
WASN'T JAMES.
SO I WENT WITH JANICE THANK YOU
.
NO, SERIOUSLY.
AND I SCRATCHED IT OUT.
COMMISSIONER CAN SEE THIS.
THANK YOU.
SENIOR PLANNER BENNET.
THAT SENIOR MEANS A LOT SO
COMMISSIONER MILLS ALREADY
KNOWS WHAT'S GOING TO HAPPEN
AND SO I WANTED TO MAKE SURE
THAT GOT ANSWERED.
I ALSO AND WE'LL TALK ABOUT
THIS IN JUST A MINUTE AFTER WE
TAKE A BREAK.
THIS IS NOT A DONE DEAL.
EVERYONE KEEPS COMMUNICATING
WITH US AS IF EVERYTHING IS
GOING TO STOP TODAY.
>> IT'S NOT IT'S GOING TO
CONTINUE AND IT'S GOING TO
CONTINUE TO CONTINUE.
AS A MATTER OF FACT, WE ARE
STILL IMPLEMENTING THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN FROM 2009
LIKE WE DID NOT FINISH THAT
PROCESS JUST SO THAT EVERYBODY
IN THE ROOM KNOWS.
SO THIS IS NOT A ONE AND DONE
AND AS A MATTER OF FACT, EVERY
FIVE YEARS WE HAVE TO AT THIS
TABLE DECIDE DO WE WANT TO TAKE
THE PLAN?
DO WE WANT TO MAKE CHANGES OR
ARE WE STILL IN AN
IMPLEMENTATION PHASE?
>> SO THIS IS NOT LIKE
CONCLUDED IN ANY WAY AND I
THINK MY COLLEAGUES AT THE
TABLE HAVE ALREADY EXPRESSED
IT.
BUT I'LL JUST SAY IT AGAIN THIS
PLAN IS DIFFERENT THEN WHERE IT
STARTED.
I APPRECIATE COMMISSIONER ADAM
SAYING SOME PEOPLE WILL BE
DISAPPOINTED.
YOU KNOW, WHO'S DISAPPOINTED?
I AM I AM DISAPPOINTED.
I LIVE IN A R ONE C AND MY
COUNCIL MEMBERS HAVE DECIDED TO
EXCLUDE MY NEIGHBORHOOD FROM UP
ZONING.
I WANT MORE HOUSING IN MY
NEIGHBORHOOD AND I WAS TOLD NO,
I'M DISAPPOINTED.
I'M ABSOLUTELY DISAPPOINTED.
I WANT THE KIDS THAT GO TO
SCHOOL WITH MY KIDS TO LIVE IN
OUR NEIGHBORHOOD.
I WANT MY SON TO BE ABLE TO
PLAY WITH HIS FRIENDS WHO
BECAUSE THEY CAN'T LIVE IN MY
NEIGHBORHOOD THEY HAVE TO BE
DRIVEN AND THEY HAVE TO BE
BUSED.
I WANT MY DAUGHTER'S FRIEND WHO
SHE DOES ARIEL WITH EVERY WEEK
TO LIVE AROUND THE CORNER NOT
THREE MILES AWAY.
I WANT THEM TO HAVE WHAT I HAD
WAS A RICH NEIGHBORHOOD FULL
OF FRIENDS WHERE THEY COULD BE
FREE TO OPERATE IN THIS CITY AS
IF THE CITY WAS BUILT FOR THEM
.
SO I APPRECIATE WHAT
COMMISSIONER ADAM SAYS THERE
ARE SOME PEOPLE WHO WILL BE
DISAPPOINTED.
I'M ONE OF THEM WITH THAT.
>> WE'RE GOING TO TAKE A TEN
MINUTE BREAK AND THEN WE'LL
COME BACK AND RESUME OUR
MEETING
.
>> ALL RIGHT.
WE ARE BACK.
THANK YOU ALL AND THANK YOU FOR
THOSE OF YOU WHO ARE STILL HERE
WITH US, WE ARE NOW ON THE
AGENDA ITEM NUMBER NINE
UNFINISHED BUSINESS.
THERE IS NONE NO, I'M SORRY.
I'M GOING I'M GOING THERE I'M
GOING THERE RIGHT NOW WE ARE ON
THE AGENDA ITEM NUMBER EIGHT
WHICH ARE PUBLIC HEARINGS
SCHEDULED FOR THE NEXT BUSINESS
MEETING AND WE WILL HEAR FROM
MANAGER KELLY.
THERE IS A SITE PLAN FOR
PLANNING COMMISSION APPROVAL
SCHEDULED FOR YOUR THURSDAY
OCTOBER SIXTEEN TWENTY TWENTY
FIVE MEETING.
THIS MEETING WILL START AT FIVE
THIRTY PM.
WE ARE PUTTING THIS IN OUR
ANNOUNCEMENTS IN LIEU OF IT
BEING A FORMAL PUBLIC HEARING.
THIS WILL BE A DEDICATED PUBLIC
COMMENT PERIOD FOR THE PROJECT.
THREE FIFTY SOUTH FIFTH STREET
THE PUDI SITE PLAN FOR PLANNING
COMMISSION APPROVAL.
THIS IS A PROPOSED SITE PLAN TO
DEVELOP A MIXED USE BUILDING
CONTAINING GROUND FLOOR RETAIL
AND THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTY
APARTMENTS ON POINT EIGHT ACRE
SITE ZONE THREE FIFTY S PUDI
THE BUILDING WOULD BE A THREE
HUNDRED AND THIRTEEN THOUSAND
SQUARE FOOT SITE WITH I'M SORRY
BUILDING WITH TWENTY STOREYS
SITE IMPROVEMENTS INCLUDE
CREATING A SHARED SERVICE DRIVE
ALONG THE NORTH SIDE OF THE
SITE FROM SOUTH TO SOUTH FOR
THE FOUR SOLID WASTE ACCESS AND
FUTURE USE BY EIGHTY FOUR
ADDITIONAL BUS BOARDINGS.
THE ZONING DISTRICT IN
SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS WERE
APPROVED BY ORDINANCE TWENTY
TWO DASH ZERO THREE ON APRIL
4TH TWENTY TWENTY TWO AND I
WILL NOTE THAT THIS MEETING
WILL TAKE PLACE IN THE BASEMENT
OF CITY HALL DUE TO A CONFLICT
WITH OSA FOR COUNCIL CHAMBERS
ORATE.
>> THANK YOU.
NOW WE WILL MOVE ON TO AGENDA
ITEM NUMBER NINE UNFINISHED
BUSINESS THERE IS ONE THEN THAT
TAKES US TO AGENDA ITEM NUMBER
TEN REGULAR BUSINESS THERE IS
NONE WHICH NOW BRINGS US TO
AGENDA ITEM NUMBER ELEVEN OTHER
BUSINESS.
THIS IS THE REVIEW THE
COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE PLAN
THIRD DRAUGR THE THIRD DRAFT
OF THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN IS
INTRODUCED TO THE PLANNING
COMMISSION TONIGHT PER THE
MICHIGAN PLANNING ENABLING ACT.
>> THE PLANNING COMMISSION MAY
FORWARD THIS DRAFT TO THE CITY
COUNCIL TO REQUEST APPROVAL TO
BEGIN THE SIXTY THREE DAY
REVIEW PERIOD.
WE WILL START WITH A STAFF
PRESENTATION BY SENIOR PLANNER
MICHELLE BENNET.
THANK YOU.
YOU'RE WELCOME.
OK, DRAFT THREE IS HERE.
>> OH I KNOW.
OK LET ME DO THIS FULL SCREEN
AND THEN HOPEFULLY I CAN OK I
HAD ALREADY STARTED WITH THIS
BUT JUST TO BRING US BACK AS A
PART OF THE ADOPTION PROCESS
THE FIRST STEP IS FOR PLANNING
COMMISSION TO FORWARD THIS TO
COUNCIL.
IF YOU CHOOSE TO DO THAT
TONIGHT THEN THIS WILL BE
SLATED FOR THE OCTOBER 20TH
COUNCIL MEETING FOR THEM TO
APPROVE TO BEGIN THE SIXTY
THREE DAY REVIEW PERIOD.
THE ACTUAL ADOPTION OF THIS
PLAN WOULD NOT TAKE PLACE UNTIL
WHAT WE HAVE HERE IS FEBRUARY
OR MARCH.
>> OF COURSE THAT'S GOING TO
DEPEND ON WHAT HAPPENS ON
OCTOBER 20TH.
SO THIS IS STILL SUBJECT TO
CHANGE BUT THIS IS OUR CURRENT
TIMELINE.
I WANT TO BRING US BACK TO THE
RESOLUTION THAT WAS MADE BY
COUNCIL AT THE VERY BEGINNING
OF THIS PROCESS.
I WILL SAY BETWEEN DRAFT TWO
AND THE THIRD DRAFT MY JOB HAS
BEEN TO MAKE SURE ALL OF THE
EDITS THAT YOU REQUESTED WERE
MADE AND THAT THEY ARE IN
ALIGNMENT WITH THIS RESOLUTION
UM FROM FROM STAFF PERSPECTIVE
I FEEL LIKE THAT HAS BEEN
ACCOMPLISHED THROUGH THIS
DRAFT.
BUT WE CAN DISCUSS AS YOU ALL
CAN DISCUSS AS A COMMISSION.
>> BUT I DO WANT TO MAKE SURE
THAT YOU THIS IS WHAT YOU FEEL
COMFORTABLE WITH TONIGHT THAT
WHEN YOU FORWARD IT ALONG, IF
YOU FORWARD IT ALONG THAT WE
ARE ACHIEVING THEIR INITIAL
RESOLUTION.
UM, THIS IS REALLY FOR NEW
READERS TO THE PLAN.
I WANTED TO BE CLEAR ABOUT HOW
EVERYTHING IS SET UP IN CHAPTER
ONE WE DO TALK ABOUT WHAT A
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN IS AND THE
PROCESS BECAUSE THIS IS ONE
OF THE VERY FEW PROCESSES
THAT'S OUTLINED IN STATE
LEGISLATION WHERE THEY TELL US
WHAT IT NEEDS TO CONTAIN AND
WHAT THE ADOPTION PROCESS IS.
SO THAT IS LAID OUT AND THERE'S
ALSO DATA WHICH WE'RE CALLING
KIND OF LIKE A SNAPSHOT OF ANN
ARBOR THAT'S SORT OF OUR
EXISTING CONDITIONS ARE OUR
MAJOR ISSUES.
CHAPTER TWO TALKS ABOUT PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT.
I DO WANT TO DRAW PEOPLE'S
ATTENTION THAT THERE IS ONLY A
BRIEF SUMMARY THERE IN THE PLAN
BUT THAT THERE IS A MUCH MORE
DETAILED ENGAGEMENT SUMMARY IN
THE APPENDIX.
IT'S ABOUT 70 PAGES AND IT
OUTLINES EVERYTHING THAT WE DID
UP UNTIL THE FIRST DRAFT.
SO ABOUT THE END MIDDLE TO END
OF MAY TWENTY TWENTY FIVE SINCE
THEN WE HAVE CONTINUED TO GO TO
MEETINGS THAT WE ARE INVITED TO
BUT THEY THAT ENGAGEMENT
SUMMARY CURRENTLY ENDS AT MAY
THE VISION AND VALUES IS OUR
VISION STATEMENT AND A
DESCRIPTION OF OUR VALUES WHICH
I THINK ALSO HAS A VERY CLEAR
DESCRIPTION HERE OF SOME OF THE
TRADE OFFS THAT WE NEED TO
CONSIDER IN THAT NOT EVERY
SINGLE DEVELOPMENT MIGHT NOT
ACHIEVE 100 PERCENT OF EVERY
SINGLE VALUE THAT WE HAVE.
AND SO THAT HAS BEEN ADDED TO
SET THAT EXPECTATION FOR OUR
RESIDENTS.
>> UM, CHAPTER FOUR IS THE CRUX
OF THE PLAN.
I WOULD SAY THIS IS WHERE ALL
OF OUR GOALS AND STRATEGIES ARE
LISTED FOR THREE DIFFERENT GOAL
AREAS HOUSING AND NEIGHBORHOODS
,ECONOMY AND OPPORTUNITY,
INFRASTRUCTURE AND SERVICES.
THIS IS FRAMED BY SEEING
LISTING OUT WHAT WE HEARD FROM
THE COMMUNITY AND THEN KEY
CONSIDERATIONS OUR DATA POINTS
ALONG WITH MAPS AND REALLY THE
RATIONALE FOR OUR GOALS AND
STRATEGIES IN THE FUTURE AND
LAND USE CHAPTER CHAPTER FIVE
WE DESCRIBE THE THREE
CATEGORIES SO WE'VE HEARD FROM
RESIDENTS SOME OF THIS IS STILL
FEELING UNCLEAR.
>> I WOULD DIRECT YOU TO THAT
CHAPTER.
IT ALSO HAS THE ZONING PLAN
WHICH POINTS OUT WHAT WE'RE
PROPOSING, WHAT WE HAVE
CURRENTLY AND WHAT WOULD NEED
TO CHANGE FOR US TO GO FROM
WHAT WE HAVE CURRENTLY TO WHAT
WE PROPOSE.
AND THEN LASTLY IS THE
IMPLEMENTATION SECTION THAT'S
MATRIX THAT WE HAVE DISCUSSED.
BUT ONE OF THE NEWER ADDITIONS
IS
THE METRICS THAT HAVE BEEN
ADDED TO THE GOALS AND THOSE
ARE WHAT WE ARE GOING TO HOLD
OURSELVES ACCOUNTABLE TO.
THAT'S THE DATA THAT WE ARE
GOING TO COLLECT AND REPORT OUT
ON AND REVIEW WHEN IT COMES
TIME TO THAT FIVE YEARS WHERE
WE HAVE TO MAKE A DECISION
OF WHETHER TO UPDATE THE PLAN
OR NOT.
I ALSO LISTED HERE JUST SOME
OF THE MAJOR CHANGES SINCE
DRAFT ONE.
THERE'S TWO SLIDES HERE.
>> THIS IS REALLY AGAIN FOR THE
PUBLIC IF YOU WANT TO TAKE A
LOOK AT THIS, THERE HAVE BEEN
QUITE A FEW CHANGES THAT HAVE
BEEN MADE OVER THESE THESE TWO
DRAFTS.
>> UM, BUT I COULD CALL YOUR
ATTENTION IF YOU WANT TO SEE
MORE SPECIFICALLY THAT WAS AN
OVERVIEW BULLET POINTS.
BUT THE SECOND BULLET POINT
HERE PLANNING COMMISSION EDITS
FOR DRAFT THREE.
THIS IS ABOUT 20 PAGES WORTH
OF ALL OF THE EDITS THAT WERE
REQUESTED.
>> IT'S IN TONIGHT'S PACKET.
IT'S BEEN IN THE PACKET ON AND
OFF SINCE JULY 1ST WHEN WE
STARTED THAT DISCUSSION.
THERE'S ALSO THE PLANNING
COMMISSION'S RESPONSE TO
COUNCIL'S JULY TWENTY TWENTY
FIVE RESOLUTION SO YOU CAN SEE
WHERE IN THE PLAN WE ADDRESSED
ALL OF THOSE AND THEN REGISTER
AGAIN JUST FOR A PLUG FOR
ANYONE WHO WANTS TO FIGURE OUT
HOW TO FIND THE AGENDAS,
RECORDINGS AND MEETING MINUTES
FOR ALL OF THESE MEETINGS.
>> THOSE ARE ALL PUBLICLY
AVAILABLE AND A PLUG FOR OUR
ENGAGEMENT HUB.
>> OF COURSE WHEN I WAS
ENGAGEMENT SPECIALIST I HELPED
WITH MY COLLEAGUE AT THIS
LAUNCH.
I'M VERY PROUD OF IT.
THIS IS A QR CODE IF YOU WANT
TO SCAN IT.
IT'S ALSO LINKED HERE.
THIS IS WHERE WE'RE MAKING A
LOT OF OUR UPDATES IS WHERE THE
DRAFTS ARE POSTED, THE
APPENDICES ARE POSTED WHERE OUR
TIMELINE IS POSTED, WHERE THE
COUNCIL RESOLUTIONS ARE POSTED.
SO THIS IS A GREAT RESOURCE FOR
ANYONE WHO WANTS TO STAY
INVOLVED.
I THINK THAT'S THE LAST SLIDE.
I'LL LEAVE THIS UP THOUGH
BECAUSE THIS WILL GIVE EVERYONE
THE RESOURCES THAT THEY NEED SO
THAT'S MEANT TO BE A QUICK
SUMMARY OF WHAT WE'VE DONE,
WHAT WE'VE BEEN DOING OVER THE
LAST FEW MONTHS HERE.
AND A REMINDER TO YOU ALL WHAT
YOU ARE TASKED WITH TONIGHT.
YOU CAN SEE IN YOUR PACKET
THERE IS ALSO A MOTION THAT
MOTION WOULD BE FOR YOU ALL TO
FORWARD THE THE DRAFT PLAN AS
IS TO THE PLANNING I'M SORRY TO
CITY COUNCIL FOR THEM TO REVIEW
AND DECIDE IF THEY WANT TO
BEGIN THE SIXTY THREE DAY
REVIEW PERIOD.
I'M GOING TO MENTION A FEW
THINGS IN BETWEEN ONCE IT'S
LET'S ASSUME THAT THERE IS A
SIXTY THREE DAY REVIEW PERIOD
IN OUR NEAR FUTURE.
WHAT WE'RE PLANNING TO DO IS
HAVE A COMMENT BOX ON THE
ENGAGEMENT HUB ON OUR PROJECT
PAGE SO WE CAN COLLECT COMMENTS
THAT WAY.
THAT WAY IT WILL BE A VERY EASY
EXPORT WHERE EVERYTHING IS
SAVED ALL TOGETHER AT ONCE.
>> UM THERE MAY BE A FEW
PROCESS THINGS FOR US TO DECIDE
TONIGHT OR POTENTIALLY NEXT
MEETING BUT OUR PLAN IS TO
SHARE THOSE COMMENTS WITH YOU
AS WE GO THROUGH THE SIXTY
DAYS.
SIXTY THREE DAY REVIEW PERIOD
SO THAT YOU CAN SEE WHAT IS
COMING YOUR WAY AND SO THAT WE
COULD IF YOU ALL CHOOSE TO
CONTINUE TO DISCUSS UH DISCUSS
THIS DURING THAT TIME AND TAKE
YOUR EDITS AS WELL.
SO THE ASSUMPTION IS NOT
TONIGHT THAT THERE ARE THAT
THIS IS ABSOLUTELY PERFECT AND
THAT THERE ARE NO EDITS.
IT'S DO YOU THINK WE HAVE
PROVIDED THE INFORMATION WE'VE
ASKED FOR THAT IT CAN BE
FORWARDED ON TO THE CITY
COUNCIL TONIGHT?
ANY EDITS THAT YOU HAVE WE CAN
STILL DISCUSS DURING A SIXTY
THREE DAY REVIEW PERIOD.
WE CAN TAKE NOTE ON IT ALONG
WITH THE THE RESIDENTS COMMENTS
THAT WE RECEIVE AND GET THOSE
INCORPORATED FOR THE FINAL
DRAFT.
>> GREAT.
THANK YOU.
I WILL READ THE MOTION AND THEN
IF IT IS SECONDED AND APPROVED
WE WILL GO INTO DISCUSSION
BEFORE VOTING SO EVERYONE'S
EXPECTATION.
ALL RIGHT GREAT.
THE MOTION READS THE ANN ARBOR
CITY PLANNING COMMISSION HEREBY
RECOMMENDS THAT THE MAYOR AND
CITY COUNCIL AUTHORIZE
DISTRIBUTION OF THE CITY OF ANN
ARBOR COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE
PLAN FOR REVIEW AND COMMENT TO
ADJOINING JURISDICTIONS AND
STAKEHOLDERS IN ACCORDANCE WITH
MS S.L ONE TWO FIVE THREE EIGHT
ZERO ONE AT SEQUIM.
>> WHAT IS THIS SEQUEL?
THANK YOU.
>> THE MICHIGAN PLANNING
ENABLING ACT PUBLIC ACT THREE
OF 2008 AS AMENDED MOVE BY
COMMISSIONER M. SECONDED BY
COUNCIL MEMBER DISH WE ARE IN
DISCUSSION COMMISSIONER
HAMMERSCHMIDT KEEP FORGETTING
MY NAME.
I'M NOT FORGETTING YOUR NAME
I'M JUST PAUSING.
OK OK YES.
ONE PROCESS QUESTION I GUESS
HOW WILL PEOPLE BE NOTIFIED OR
ALERTED THAT THE SIXTY THREE
DAY COMMENT PERIOD IS A THING
AND WHERE THEY SHOULD GO
BECAUSE AS YOU HAVE HEARD WE'VE
HAD A LOT OF CONCERN OVER
NOTIFICATION.
THANK YOU FOR BRINGING THAT UP.
WE'VE ALREADY BEEN IN
DISCUSSION WITH OUR
COMMUNICATIONS TEAM.
WE ARE GOING TO COME UP WITH A
PLAN SO WE HAVE YOU KNOW,
THIRTEEN MORE DAYS TO FIGURE
THAT OUT.
>> BUT WE WE DO UNDERSTAND THAT
OUTREACH NEEDS TO BE
SIGNIFICANT FOR THIS PORTION.
AND SO I DON'T HAVE EXACT
ANSWERS FOR YOU RIGHT NOW.
BUT PLEASE KNOW THAT WE ARE WE
ARE THINKING ABOUT THAT AND
PRICING THINGS OUT AND FIGURE
OUT WHAT THE BEST OPTIONS ARE.
>> OK, AND THEN ONE MORE
QUESTION ON THE TIMELINE
FEBRUARY, MARCH VERSUS EARLIER
ARE YOU TAKING LIKE HOLIDAYS
INTO ACCOUNT SO THE SIXTY THREE
DAY REVIEW PERIOD IF IT STARTS
ON OCTOBER TWENTY FIRST IT
WOULD GO INTO RIGHT BEFORE
CHRISTMAS AND SO I THINK THAT'S
PROBABLY BEST LEFT FOR COUNCIL
TO DECIDE IF THEY WANT TO
EXTEND THAT WE COULD EXTEND
THAT SIXTY THREE DAYS REVIEW
PERIOD PAST THE HOLIDAYS BUT
LIKE I SAID DURING THAT TIME
THERE WILL BE EDITS SO WE WOULD
LIKE TO GIVE THE CONSULTANT JAN
TO MAKE THOSE IT'S HARD TO PICK
THE EXACT TIME FRAME BECAUSE WE
DON'T KNOW TO WHAT EXTENT THE
EDITS WHAT THOSE WILL ENTAIL
BUT GENERALLY WE ARE PLANNING
TO GIVE THEM MOST OF JANUARY TO
MAKE THOSE SO THAT IT CAN COME
BACK TO YOU ON FEBRUARY AND
THEN TO COUNCIL IN MARCH.
>> FOR WHAT IT'S WORTH, I THINK
THAT ACTUALLY MAKES SENSE JUST
TO EXTEND IT PAST THE SIXTY
THREE DAYS OVER THE HOLIDAYS I
MEAN MAYBE IT'S A FUN HOLIDAY
READING FOR SOME PEOPLE I DON'T
KNOW BUT TO THE TO THE EXTENT
THAT WE'RE NOT WE'RE GIVING A
LITTLE MORE TIME JUST IN THE
INTEREST OF I DON'T KNOW YOU
KNOW, MORE TIME I WOULD BE IN
FAVOR OF THAT.
I DON'T THINK THE CONSULTANTS
WOULDN'T DO MUCH OVER THE
HOLIDAYS ANYWAY.
>> SO THANK YOU.
>> ALL RIGHT.
OTHER COMMISSIONERS,
COMMISSIONER MILLS.
>> YEAH.
I'M CURIOUS ABOUT HOW WHEN THIS
IS GOING TO APPEAR ON OUR
AGENDA IS TO TO TO THINK
THROUGH SOME OF THAT FEEDBACK
AND WHAT IF YOU'VE THOUGHT
ABOUT WHAT THE MOST USEFUL
FORMAT FOR THAT IS?
>> I MEAN I DO THINK CONCEPTS
LIKE SPECIFIC EDITS ARE THE
THINGS AS I SAID TONIGHT I
THINK THAT ARE MOST USEFUL AND
WHEN I HEAR THEM I PUT THEM
THROUGH MY BRAIN THINKING LIKE
DO I THINK THAT THIS BATTLE IS
IN KEEPING SOMETHING THAT I
WOULD WANT TO BRING FORWARD?
SO SOME OF THEM MAY COME EARLY
AND IT'S OPEN FOR SIXTY THREE
DAYS FOR A REASON.
SO I DON'T WANT TO LIKE SAY
THERE'S NOTHING BUT I THINK
THAT THERE ARE SOME THAT WE
ALREADY GOT IN OUR PACKET AND
WE HEARD TONIGHT THAT WERE
SPECIFIC THAT I THINK MERIT
DISCUSSION BUT POTENTIALLY AND
SO I'M JUST NOT SURE WHEN WE
SHOULD BE READY.
WELL UM WE CAN WE CAN PUT THIS
ON THE AGENDA FOR YOUR MEETINGS
DURING THE SIXTY THREE DAY
REVIEW PERIOD AND THEN I THINK
IT'S HARD TO PLAN AROUND THE
COMMENTS BECAUSE THEY'RE GOING
TO BE ROLLING IN RIGHT
CONTINUOUSLY.
BUT I THINK WHATEVER DAYS THAT
WE CHOOSE FOR IT TO BE ON YOUR
AGENDA WE CAN ALSO INCLUDE
THOSE COMMENTS IN YOUR PACKET
FOR FROM WHAT WE'VE RECEIVED
UNTIL THAT DAY AND THEN AT YOUR
NEXT MEETING WHAT WE'VE
RECEIVED UNTIL THAT DAY.
SO THAT YOU GET A CHANCE TO SEE
ALL OF THEM DOES SOUND GOOD.
I THINK SO.
UM, YEAH.
>> AND I'M JUST CURIOUS HOW
MANY TIMES DO YOU THINK WE'RE
GOING TO HAVE THIS ON OUR
AGENDA?
YEAH, IS THAT SOMETHING FOR YOU
ALL TO DECIDE?
IT'S I MEAN FROM MY PERSPECTIVE
IT'S GOING TO BE BASED ON A
NUMBER OF EDITS YOU WANT TO
DISCUSS AND HOW MANY PUBLIC
COMMENTS COME IN.
AND SO I DON'T KNOW THOSE
NUMBERS YET.
UH, RIGHT.
>> SO SO WE COULD ALREADY HAVE
AGENDAS IF YOU WOULD LIKE TO
ADD TO THAT.
>> WELL, ONE OF THE THINGS I
WAS THINKING THROUGH WAS
WHETHER OR NOT WE WANTED TO DO
IT AS YOU JUST SUGGESTED, WHICH
IS SORT OF A ROLLING COLLECTION
OR IF WE WANT IT TO RECEIVE
EVERYTHING BECAUSE I IMAGINE WE
STILL HAVE TO HAVE A PUBLIC
HEARING WHAT WE ARE FINISHED
BEFORE WE SEND IT TO COUNCIL.
SO THERE'S PROBABLY LEAD UP
TIME TO THAT.
SO THE SIXTY THREE DAYS FINISH
YOU'VE COLLECTED EVERYTHING AND
SAY OK HERE ARE ALL THE
COMMENTS, HERE'S HOW WE'VE
ORGANIZED THEM.
LET'S HAVE A MEETING TO WORK
THROUGH THOSE AND THEN ONCE
WE'VE WORKED THROUGH THEM THEN
WE WOULD SAY NOW WE'RE READY TO
SEND THIS OFF TO THE
CONSULTANTS FOR THE FINAL EDIT
AND THEN IT COMES BACK AND THAT
WE HAVE A PUBLIC HEARING ABOUT
THE FINAL EDIT AND THEN WE
ABOUT THE FINAL HOUR OF IT AND
THEN WE SEND IT ON TO COUNCIL.
GO AHEAD, COMMISSIONER
QUESTIONS IF WE REVIEW
THE
COMMENTS RECEIVED DURING YOUR
SUGGESTING THAT WE REVIEW THE
COMMENTS RECEIVED DURING THE 63
DAY COMMENT PERIOD BEFORE THEY
GO TO THE CONSULTANT FOR
INCORPORATION INTO THE PLAN.
I MEAN WE HAVE TO WE MUST DO
THAT.
YES.
BECAUSE IT'S NOT CORRECT.
SO IT WOULD MAKE SENSE FOR YOU
ALL TO REVIEW.
>> YEAH.
I MEAN I DON'T I DON'T THINK
WE'RE SENDING COMMENTS DIRECTLY
FROM WHEREVER THEY COME FROM TO
THE CONSULTANT BECAUSE THAT
WOULD IMPLY THAT WE WANT THE
CONSULTANT TO DO IMPLEMENT
THOSE COMMENTS WHICH WE MAY NOT
WANT.
>> SO THAT ACTUALLY IS KIND
OF PROBLEMATIC.
I MEAN I DON'T THINK THAT'S
TRULY BEEN ACCOUNTED FOR IN THE
TIMELINE EXACTLY WHICH PART
THAT THAT PLANNING COMMISSION.
YEAH, I VIEW IT SIMILARLY TO
ALL THE EMAILS THAT ARE IN YOUR
POCKET.
YEAH, RIGHT.
SO IT WOULD BE SIMILAR TO
EXCEPT IF WE TRIED TO
CONSOLIDATE THEM THROUGH THE
HUB IT MIGHT BE AN EXCEL SHEET
INSTEAD OF FIFTY FIVE DIFFERENT
CVS.
>> WELL THAT WOULD BE GOOD BUT
THAT'S THE OK YEAH SO THEN WE
WOULD NEED TO HAVE A MEETING AT
THE EARLIEST POSSIBLE IN
JANUARY BECAUSE WE'RE TALKING
ABOUT WANTING THE CONSULTANTS
TO HAVE THE MONTH OF JANUARY TO
EDIT.
>> YES OK LET'S COMMISSIONER
NORTON WAS GOING TO NOODLE AND
NEWDOW WE YOU KNOW I GUESS USE
THAT WORD.
WHAT DO YOU DO NOODLING ON THIS
A BIT?
I HAVE SOME COMMENTS ON
TONIGHT'S DRAFT THAT I WOULD
LIKE THE COMMISSION TO CONSIDER
AND I HEARD SOME COMMENTS THIS
EVENING THAT I WANT TO
CONSIDER.
I THINK SOME REALLY GOOD
COMMENTS WERE RAISED THAT WE
SHOULD TALK ABOUT AND THINK
ABOUT.
>> CAN I ASK A CLARIFYING
QUESTION OF WHAT YOU MEAN BY
THAT?
DO YOU MEAN THAT YOU WANT THOSE
COMMENTS TO BE REVIEWED AND A
NEW A FOURTH DRAFT CREATED ?
>> NO.
WELL, I THINK WE'RE READY WE'RE
GOING TO IF WE'RE GOING TO
MEANINGFULLY TAKE COMMENTS AND
RESPOND TO THEM, WE'RE GOING TO
GENERATE A FOURTH DRAFT.
>> BUT IT'S ALL A MATTER
OF TIMING.
YEAH.
SO I'M OK WITH I THINK THAT I
DON'T I DON'T SEE FATAL FLAWS.
I KNOW THAT PEOPLE ARE NOT
EVERYBODY IS HAPPY WITH WHERE
THE PLANE IS.
I THINK IT'S MADE GREAT
PROGRESS AND IF WE ADDRESSED A
LOT OF FOLKS CONCERNS BUT I
STILL HAVE SOME CONCERNS THAT I
WOULD LIKE US TO ADDRESS SOME
MORE I'M OK.
I THINK IT'S CLOSE ENOUGH TO
SEND OUT FOR PUBLIC COMMENT BUT
I THINK IT WOULD BE FRUITFUL
FOR US TO DISCUSS IT AT LEAST A
COUPLE MORE TIMES WHILE THOSE
COMMENTS ARE COMING IN BECAUSE
I'M GUESSING WE ALL HAVE THINGS
THAT WE THINK PROBABLY SHOULD
BE DISCUSSED AND I THINK WE CAN
DO THAT ON A ROLLING BASIS AND
AT SOME POINT THE COMMENT
PERIOD WILL END.
WE'LL HAVE ONE MORE PASS THAT
DID ANYTHING I MEAN THAT WE
NEED TO RESPOND TO.
SO I GUESS I WANT TO MAKE SURE
THAT WE ARE ACCOUNTING FOR THE
OPPORTUNITY TO DISCUSS THIS
AMONG OURSELVES.
I DON'T THINK WE NEED TO DO IT
TONIGHT BEFORE WE SEND IT
FORWARD, BUT I WANT TO MAKE
SURE WE HAVE SOME OPPORTUNITY
AT SOME POINT DURING THE
COMMENT PERIOD FOR US TO
DISCUSS THINGS WE WOULD LIKE TO
SEE CONSIDERED AND THAT WE GIVE
OURSELVES ENOUGH TIME TO
MEANINGFULLY RESPOND TO THE
COMMENTS WHEN THE PUBLIC
COMMENT PERIOD IS ENDED SO THAT
WE CAN GIVE MEANINGFUL COMMENT
TO THE CONSULTANT TO DO THE
FINAL DRAFT THAT WILL GO
FORWARD.
>> OK, SO LET ME BEFORE YOU
COMMISSIONER ADAMS MANAGER
KELLY, HOW MANY REGULAR
MEETINGS DO WE HAVE BETWEEN NOW
AND THE END OF THE YEAR?
>> I WAS JUST PULLING THAT UP.
DO YOU ARE WE JUST IN SYNC
TONIGHT?
ONE MOMENT PLEASE.
SURE.
THANK YOU SO FOR TWENTY TWENTY
FIVE AND WE CAN ALWAYS CONVERT
A COUPLE WORK WORK SESSIONS AND
SO FORTH BUT YOUR YOUR NEXT
SESSION WILL BE ON THE
SIXTEENTH BECAUSE THAT WAS
CONVERTED TO A REGULAR SESSION
BUT AFTER THE IF TONIGHT YOU
VOTE TO MOVE THIS TO CITY
COUNCIL FOR CONSIDERATION YOUR
RETREAT IS ON THE TWENTY FIRST
THE FIFTH DO YOU HAD TEN TWENTY
EIGHT PLAN SUBCOMMITTEE
PREVIOUSLY BUT THAT WAS
CANCELED ONCE THOSE MOVED TO
THE FULL BODY THAT DATE COULD
BE RECONSIDERED.
ELEVEN FIVE IS A WEDNESDAY.
THIS IS A POST-ELECTION MOVE TO
A DIFFERENT DAY OF THE WEEK.
THAT IS A REGULAR SESSION WE
HAD AN EYE ON BRINGING YOU
BICYCLE PARKING UDC AMENDMENTS
AT THAT MEETING BUT OTHERWISE
THE AGENDA IS CURRENTLY
SCHEDULED.
THERE IS WORKING SESSION ON
NOVEMBER THE 12TH.
THERE IS A REGULAR SESSION ON
NOVEMBER THE 18TH.
THERE IS A REQUEST TO REVISIT
YOUR BYLAWS IN JULY AT THIS
MEETING.
OTHER THAN THAT I DON'T HAVE
ANYTHING SCHEDULED AND THEN
DECEMBER 2ND AND DECEMBER 16TH.
>> OK, SO SO THAT'S FIVE.
>> SO THAT THAT'S IN THE TWELVE
OF NINE WORKING SESSION WHICH
COULD BE CONVERTED SO RIGHT.
SO WE HAVE AT LEAST FIVE
REGULAR MEETINGS AND WE COULD
CONVERT WORKING SESSION IF WE
NEED IT TO TO KEEP THOSE UP.
SO THE QUESTION FOR STAFF WOULD
BE HOW WHAT'S THE PROCESS BY
WHICH WE SHOULD USE TO EITHER
TAKE THE INPUT THAT WAS
RECEIVED TONIGHT EITHER THROUGH
THE PACKET OR IN PERSON TO HAVE
A FIRST CONVERSATION TO DECIDE
WHAT IF ANYTHING NEEDS TO BE
TAKEN UP FROM THAT?
>> HOW WOULD HOW WOULD YOU LIKE
TO CONSIDER THAT?
>> COULD I COME OR RELAY
THROUGH MANAGER LEONARD OR
KELLY OR DEVISE PLAN ON THE
SIXTEENTH TAKE KIND
OF CONSIDERATION RIGHT NOW THAT
WE HAVE FIVE REGULAR MEETINGS
WITH A FEW MORE OPTIONS TO
CONVERT OTHER MEETINGS AND
FIGURE OUT HOW IF I'M
UNDERSTANDING THE COMMISSION
CORRECTLY YOU WOULD LIKE TO
FIND TIME WITHIN THOSE MEETINGS
?
UM A COUPLE OF TIMES A FEW
TIMES TO REVIEW NOT ONLY THE
COMMENTS YOU HAVE NOW BUT WHAT
COMES IN ON A ROLLING BASIS.
>> UM, SURE.
I DO WANT TO JUST PAUSE BECAUSE
I THINK COMMISSIONER MILLS AND
NORTON HAVE WHAT THEY ARE
ARTICULATING ARE MORE URGENT
THINGS.
>> SO I THINK OK, SO I DID I
MISUNDERSTOOD WHAT YOU WERE
SAYING BECAUSE EARLIER YOU WERE
LIKE THERE ARE THINGS THAT HERE
TONIGHT THAT I WANT TO DISCUSS
AND SO I JUST WANT TO MAKE SURE
I WAS HEARING YOU.
>> THAT DOESN'T HAPPEN.
OK, SO WHAT I WOULD WHAT I
WOULD LIKE TO PROPOSE IF STAFF
IS AMENABLE IS COULD
COMMISSIONERS WHO HAVE
SOMETHING THAT THEY'D LIKE TO
SEE AT OUR NEXT MEETING AFTER
THE SIXTEENTH COULD THOSE BE
SHARED WITH THE COMMISSION
BECAUSE THEN IT WOULD GO IF
THEY SENT IT TO THE PLANNING
EMAIL IT WOULD GO INTO THE
PUBLIC RECORD AND THEN WE WOULD
DISCUSS THEM SO THERE WOULDN'T
BE ANY PRIVATE CONVERSATION
ABOUT IT.
IT WOULD JUST BE AN INDICATION
OF THE TOPIC SO THAT WE WOULD
KNOW WHAT'S COMING.
>> ARE YOU TALKING ABOUT FOR
THE NOVEMBER 5TH MEETING?
I HAVEN'T PICKED A MEETING.
I'M JUST ASKING FOR A PROCESS
IF WE CAN USE THE PLANNING
EMAIL IF COMMISSIONERS HAVE
THINGS THEY WANT TO TIE UP FOR
A MEETING POST OCTOBER 16TH
THAT WE SEND THAT TO THE EMAIL
AND THEN YOU AS YOU HAVE
PROPOSED WOULD COME UP WITH A
FORMALIZED PROCESS SO YOU WOULD
GET SOME INDICATION HERE'S WHAT
WE'D LIKE TO REVISIT.
HERE'S WHAT WE'D LIKE TO
DISCUSS AND THEN ASSUMING WE'VE
APPROVED THINGS AT THE TABLE
TONIGHT COUNCIL HAS OPENED THE
SIXTY THREE DAY REVIEW THERE
MAY ACTUALLY BE COMMENTS THAT
HAVE COME IN AS WELL THAT YOU
WANT US TO SEE AND SO THOSE
COULD COME TO THAT AGENDA.
>> YES.
MANAGER KELLY, IT WOULDN'T BE
NECESSARY TO LISTEN TO PLANNING
IT TO GOV. DOUG IF YOUR
COMMENTS WERE SENT IN BETWEEN
NOW AND TARGET MEETING TO BE
DETERMINED AND DISCUSSED ON TEN
SIXTEEN IF THEY WERE SENT TO
MANAGER LEONARD AND PLANNER
BENNETT, SHE COULD COME MISS
BENNETT COULD COMPILE THOSE AND
WE WOULD PLACE INTO MATERIALS
THAT WOULD BE ATTACHED TO A
PUBLIC AGENDA SO IT WOULD
BECOME PUBLIC BY WAY OF THE
AGENDA.
THANK YOU FOR THAT
CLARIFICATION.
THERE WAS SOME AMBIGUITY WHEN I
PROPOSED THIS SAME PROCESS
DURING THE PLAN THAT WE
COULDN'T DO THAT BECAUSE IT
WOULD SOMEHOW NOT MEET THE OPEN
MEETINGS.
BUT I APPRECIATE YOUR
CLARIFICATION.
ARE YOU REPRESENTATIVE DIRECTLY
TO STAFF AND COPYING THE REST
OF THE COMMISSION?
>> I, I, I I DON'T KNOW WHAT I
SUGGESTED THEN BUT WHAT YOU
HAVE SAID TONIGHT CLARIFIES IS
THERE'S NOT DISCUSSION
HAPPENING WITHIN THE EMAIL
THREAD BETWEEN COUNCILORS
SHOULD IT MATTER WHO IS COPIED
FOR AWARENESS.
BUT IT ALSO WOULD BE FINE TO
SEND DIRECTLY TO STAFF AND HAVE
STAFF COMPILE AND EVERYONE ON
THE COMMISSION WILL SEE IT WHEN
IT IS PREPARED.
>> NO, I I EXPECTED THAT THAT
WOULD HAPPEN BUT I JUST OUT
OF AN ABUNDANCE DUE DILIGENCE
AND THE OPEN MEETINGS ACT
TRYING TO MAKE SURE THAT
EVERYONE KNOWS THAT THE PROCESS
IS TRANSPARENT.
COMMISSIONER ADAMS THEN
COMMISSIONER MILLS AND THEN
WE'LL SEE WHERE WE ARE.
>> THE ONLY THING I WANTED TO
SAY WAS THE FORMAT OF YOUR
COMPILATION FROM I THINK TO
WHERE YOU HAD TYPOS.
WHAT I SORT OF THINK ABOUT IS
LIKE CONSENT AGENDA LIKE STUFF
THAT IS SUBSTANTIVE BUT LIKELY
AND OFFENSIVE AND THEN STUFF
THAT WE THINK IS TRULY LIKE
LIKELY TO GENERATE SOME DEBATE
LIKE IN THOSE THREE BUCKETS
THEN MAYBE THERE'S A CATEGORY
OF PUBLIC COMMENTS THAT WE'VE
RECEIVED.
YEAH, I THINK THAT WOULD BE
REALLY HELPFUL.
THOSE ARE ORGANIZE THINGS AND
STREAMLINE THE DISCUSSION AND
IF SOMEBODY THINKS SOMETHING ON
THE WHAT I'M CALLING THEY
CONSENT THAT MERITS DISCUSSION
THEY CAN ALWAYS PULL IT OFF
RIGHT.
AND THEN TO ADD ON TO WHAT
COMMISSIONER ADAMS JUST SAID
FROM PROCESS POINT OF VIEW, I'D
LIKE TO USE THE SAME PROCESS
THAT WE USED FOR THE COMP PLAN
WHICH WAS STAFF WILL BRING A
RECOMMENDATION FOR US TO LOOK
AT AND THEN IF SOMEONE FEELS
STRONGLY WE'LL DO IT WITH A
MOTION LIKE WE DID THROUGH THE
PROCESS.
SO THOSE WILL HAVE TO BE
REGULAR MEETINGS IF WE ARE
TAKING VOTES SO WE WON'T BE
ABLE TO USE WORKING SESSIONS TO
HAVE THOSE DISCUSSIONS.
>> YES, OK, OK.
ALL RIGHT.
COMMISSIONER MILLS ALREADY BEEN
SAID THANK YOU COUNCIL MEMBER
DISH WHAT ARE WE TALKING ABOUT?
>> TWO SMALL THINGS OK?
YES AND WHICH ARE TO THE PLAN.
>> SO I THINK THERE WAS A
CONVERSATION WITH MR. CHAMBERS
WHO RAISED A QUESTION WHETHER
THE TIMELINE FOR MAKING CHANGES
THAT SUPPORT COMMUNITY LAND
TRUST IT'S IN THE TIMELINE FOR
FIVE TO SIX YEARS IF THAT COULD
BE MOVED UP THIS THIS
CONVERSATION JUST HAPPENED I
THINK.
YES.
AND IS THAT SOMETHING THAT CAN
BE DONE BEFORE THE COMMENT
PERIOD OR IS THAT GOES ON OUR
LIST?
>> I WOULD THINK THAT WOULD GO
ON THE LIST, YEAH.
I THINK THAT GOES ON THE LIST.
YEAH, THAT'S WHAT I THOUGHT MR.
CHAMBERS THOUGHT IT COULD BE
DONE NOW SO I I WANT A
CLARIFICATION JUST FOR PROCESS
EFFICIENCY THAT WOULD BE MAKING
AN ENTIRE NEW DOCUMENT FOR ONE
SMALL CHANGE THAT WE ARE AWARE
OF AND THAT WE CAN DISCUSS AND
MAKE AT A LATER.
>> YES, I WOULD SUGGEST THAT
GOES ON THE LIST OK AND IS
THERE ANY WAY WE COULD BOLDFACE
OR MOVE THE LINK TO I DON'T
THINK ANYONE IS GOING TO READ
IT BUT THE HOUSING LITERATURE
REVIEW IT'S ACTUALLY REALLY
HARD TO FIND.
>> I KNOW IT'S THE VERY I
CLOCKED THAT AS WELL.
I THINK THAT'S ANOTHER EDIT
THAT CAN BE MADE DURING THIS
DURING NOW.
>> YEAH NOT NOW LATER.
OK YEAH IT SHOULD IT MAYBE IF
IT'S MOVED TO THE END AND THEN
IT'S IN OR SOMETHING BECAUSE
RIGHT NOW YOU JUST LIKE YOU
READ THE KEY FINDINGS AND THEN
YOU DON'T KNOW THAT THERE'S
ANYTHING ELSE BECAUSE YOU MAYBE
I'M NOT UNDERSTANDING YOU'RE
REFERRING TO THE HOUSING
APPENDIX THAT STAFF WROTE.
>> YES I'M REFERRING TO THE
LITERATURE REVIEW THE LINK TO
CAN YOU SEE AND IT'S JUST VERY
DIFFICULT TO AND IT SEEMS TO ME
THAT THAT'S A DUCK THAT'S A
GOOGLE DOC THAT'S OURS.
>> UM, NO IT SHOULD BE BOTH THE
THE THE LITERATURE.
>> YEAH, IT IS.
SO CAN'T WE MOVE THE LINK TO IT
OR BUILD IT SO THAT YOU FIND IT
BUT LIKE NATURALLY WHEN YOU
READ AN OVERVIEW THEN YOU WANT
TO GO INTO MORE DETAIL AND SO
THAT'S WHERE YOU'RE LOOKING FOR
THE LINK AND I JUST THINK THAT
PEOPLE ARE NOT GOING TO FIND IT
AND I ALSO THINK PEOPLE ARE
GOING TO READ IT.
>> SO I'M NOT GOING TO LEAD FOR
THIS BUT I CAN'T FIND IT.
>> I WAS LOOKING FOR IT DURING
THAT MEETING.
YEAH, OK, GREAT.
>> SO BACK TO THE MOTION.
DO WE HAVE ANY MORE DISCUSSION
ON THE MOTION TO ADVANCE THIS
VERSION TO CITY COUNCIL FOR
SIXTY THREE DAY REVIEW
COMMISSIONER MILLS THIS IS
SOMETHING SEPARATE BUT WHAT'S
NOT COVERED BEFORE TO BE CLEAR
THAT WILL BE THE NINETY PAGE
WHICH IS BECAUSE IT'S DOUBLE
LIKE SOMETHING LIKE THE SPREAD.
YEAH.
THANK YOU.
THAT'S THE ACTUAL WORD PLUS THE
APPENDIX LIKE WHEN WE CIRCULATE
IT IT WILL GO WITH BOTH
OF THOSE TOGETHER.
YES.
OK GREAT.
>> COMMISSIONER WEATHERBEE, I
THINK THIS IS JUST GOING TO GO
IN THE COMMENTS BUT IS THERE
ANY SORT OF THE APPENDICES ARE
DIFFICULT TO FOLLOW THROUGH
PAGE WISE AND LIKE THERE'S NO
REAL LIKE THERE THERE ISN'T A
TABLE OF CONTENTS.
>> THERE ISN'T AND SO THERE'S A
TABLE OF CONTENTS FOR THE FIRST
APPENDIX BUT THEN SOME THAT
INCLUDES SOME OF THE
INFORMATION THERE'S THERE'S
ONLY A COUPLE OF PLACES IN THE
BODY THAT REFER TO THE
APPENDICES AND THEY'RE NOT
QUITE THE SAME.
>> SO LIKE IT'S JUST VERY
THEY'RE VERY DIFFICULT TO
FOLLOW THROUGH.
>> I DON'T KNOW IF WE CAN SPLIT
THE APPENDICES OUT OR YOU MEAN
FOR THE CIRCULATION PERIOD
DURING THIS CRIT.
I MEAN THAT'S WHAT IT IS IS
IT'S DEFINITELY SOMETHING THAT
WE CAN DEAL WITH DOWN THE WAY.
BUT IT'S THEY'RE DIFFICULT TO
PASS THROUGH AND LIKE THE
PAGINATION ISN'T ISN'T
CONTIGUOUS AND THERE'S IT'S A
LITTLE BIT COMPLICATED.
SO SO IF WE ARE FORWARDING THAT
IN ADDITION I DON'T I DON'T
KNOW IF THERE'S SOMETHING WE
CAN DO BEFORE OR NOT.
>> SO THIS IS TO THE ACTUAL
DOCUMENT THAT'S GOING TO BE
DISTRIBUTED.
THAT WAS WHAT COMMISSIONER
MILLS ASKED.
SO THE APPENDICES ARE IN IT NOW
AND THE THIRD VERSION BECAUSE I
HAVE IT ALL HERE AND ALL
PRINTED OUT AND SO YOUR
CLARIFICATION IS YOU WANT IT
ARE YOU ASKING FOR IT TO BE
REFORMAT IT BEFORE WE SEND IT
OUT?
I OR MAYBE JUST WITH LIKE AN
INSERTED TABLE OF CONTENTS OR
SOMETHING THAT OK COULD MAKE IT
AT ALL THAT STAFF COULD DO THAT
WE NEED TO GO BACK TO THE
BECAUSE I DON'T I DON'T THINK
IT MAKES SENSE TO REDO IT TO
SEND IT BUT IT'S IT'S DIFFICULT
TO AND THEN YOU MAKE THAT A
COMMENT FOR OUR REVIEW REVIEW.
ALL RIGHT.
SORRY COMMISSIONER NORTEN THANK
YOU FOR LETTING ME INTERRUPT OR
PERHAPS ON THE WEBSITE WHERE
IT'S DISTRIBUTED YOU BREAK IT
OUT TO MAKE IT IT IS CURRENTLY
DRAFT THREE AND THEN DRAFT
THREE APPENDICES.
IT'S TWO SEPARATE LINKS BUT YOU
COULD DO MORE TO SEPARATE OUT
THE PARTS OF THE APPENDIX TO
MAKE IT CLEAR WHAT'S IN THERE
IF WE'RE GOING TO WRITE THIS,
ONE OF THE FIRST APPENDIX IS
SEVEN A LOT OF PAGES WITH A LOT
OF STUFF AND REALLY HARD TO
FIND AND ONE OF THE CHAPTER
HEADINGS OF THE FIRST APPENDIX
IS THE SAME NAME AS ONE ONE
OF THE HOUSING.
SO I YOU NOT WANTING TO SEND IT
BACK TO THE CONSULTANT FOR
MASSIVE REFORMATTING BUT THIS
IS GOING TO GO OUT FOR THE
PUBLIC COMING.
WE DON'T WANT TO MAKE IT HARD
FOR THE PUBLIC TO FIND WHAT'S
IN IT.
SO WHATEVER YOU CAN DO ON THE
WEBSITE TO MAKE IT CLEAR THE
DIFFERENT YES.
>> SO IT'S EASY FOR THEM TO GET
TO WOULD BE IF THERE'S
SOMETHING WE CAN DO WHEN WE
SEND IT OUT FOR COMMENT LIKE TO
THE OTHER JURISDICTIONS.
I THINK HOW IT IS ON THE ENGAGE
SITE IS PROBABLY FINE BUT
PROBABLY WHAT WE WILL SEND WE
WILL SEND A LINK TO THE
COMMUNITY LINK TO OUR
ENGAGEMENT.
YEAH BECAUSE ANN ARBOR
TOWNSHIPS WHEN I GOT THERE IT
WAS IN EMAIL AND IT WAS IN OUR
PACKET ACTUALLY IT HAD A
COVER LETTER AND THEN A LINK TO
THE TO THE DRAFT.
>> SO I THINK THE ISSUE IS A
WITH THE TITLE AS YOU SAID THE
REPEATED TITLE AND THEN THE
PAGINATION STARTS OVER AGAIN
STARTS OVER TWICE THERE'S THE
ENGAGEMENT AND THEN THE DATA
APPENDIX AND THEN REVIEW
APPENDIX THERE'S THREE
IMAGINATION'S OH I THINK IF
THIS IS JUST A FORMATTING
PAGINATION ISSUE I CAN TRY TO
GET THIS FIXED FOR THE TWENTY
FIRST THAT IS GREAT OR WHEN IT
CIRCULARLY BUT AND IF IT GETS
ANY MORE COMPLICATED THAN JUST
LEAVE IT THE WAY IT IS AND
HOPEFULLY BOLDFACE OR SOMETHING
FOR THE LINK TO THE LIT REVIEW
APPENDIX BECAUSE I JUST THINK
NOBODY'S GOING TO SEE IT OK
BACK TO THE MOTION
.
ALL RIGHT.
SEEING NO DISCUSSION ARE WE
READY TO VOTE MANAGER KELLY ARE
YOU READY FOR US TO VOTE?
>> I'M READY.
>> MANAGER KELLY, WOULD YOU
PLEASE DO A ROLL CALL VOTE ON
THE MOTION AS PRESENTED
COMMISSIONER NORTEN YES.
>> YES, YES.
>> WHETHER IT BE YES MILLS' YES
DISH YES HAMMERSCHMIDT YES.
>> FABENS YES WISCH YES THAT
CARRIES THE MOTION CARRIES
THANK YOU EVERYONE.
>> THIS BRINGS US TO ITEM
NUMBER TWELVE.
I KNOW IT'S LIKE LIGHT YEARS
WORK AND THAT IT'S JUST A
MOTION AND NOW WE'RE ONTO THE
NEXT THING.
HERE WE GO.
THIS TAKES US TO AGENDA ITEM
NUMBER TWELVE PUBLIC COMMENT ON
ANY ISSUE.
THIS IS A SECOND OPPORTUNITY
FOR INDIVIDUALS TO SPEAK TO THE
PLANNING COMMISSION FOR UP TO
THREE MINUTES ON ANY ISSUE.
WE'LL FIRST HEAR FROM THOSE WHO
ARE PRESENT IN THE CHAMBERS.
THEN WE'LL HEAR FROM THOSE WHO
ARE CONNECTED TO THE MEETING
REMOTELY TO SPEAK REMOTELY.
PRESS STAR NINE IF ON PHONE OR
USE THE RAISED HAND FEATURE IF
ON ZOOM YOU WILL HEAR AN
ANNOUNCEMENT WHEN IT'S YOUR
TURN TO SPEAK, PLEASE ENSURE
THAT YOU'RE IN A QUIET AREA AND
PLEASE MUTE ANY BACKGROUND
NOISE FOR ALL PARTICIPANTS.
PLEASE STATE YOUR NAME AND
ADDRESS AT THE BEGINNING
OF YOUR COMMENTS I SKIPPED OVER
THE WHOLE PHONE ACCESS CALL
NUMBER SO LET ME DO THAT NOW
IT'S YOU WOULD CALL EIGHT SEVEN
SEVEN EIGHT FIVE THREE FIVE TO
FOUR SEVEN AND IN OUR MEETING
I'D NINE SEVEN SEVEN SIX SIX
THREE FOUR ONE TWO TWO SIX.
>> ALL RIGHT.
WITH THAT IS THERE ANYONE
PRESENT IN CHAMBERS WHO WOULD
LIKE TO SPEAK TO THE COMMISSION
AT THIS TIME SEEING NONE?
>> IS THERE ANYONE REMOTELY
SEEING I WILL CLOSE THE PUBLIC
COMMENT.
THIS TAKES US TO ITEM NUMBER
THIRTEEN COMMISSIONER PROPOSED
BUSINESS IS THERE ANY
COMMISSIONER ABRAM'S DID YOU
SAY THAT THE THURSDAY
OCTOBER 16TH TIME STARTS AT
FIVE THIRTY PM?
OK, WE MY CALENDAR DOESN'T
REFLECT THAT SO YOU COULD JUST
MAKE A NOTE TO HAVE THAT
WOULDN'T THAT BE GREAT.
>> THANK YOU
.
>> THANK YOU.
ANY OTHER COMMISSION OR
PROPOSED BUSINESS COMMISSIONER
HAMMERSCHMIDT SEE NO POS SAME
THANK YOU.
ALONG THE SAME LINES THE
RETREAT ON THE TWENTY FIRST CAN
YOU CONFIRM THE TIME OF THAT.
>> IS IT FOUR TO SEVEN?
YES WE ISSUED A SPECIAL MEETING
NOTICE THAT SHOULD BE IN
REGISTER BUT I WILL I WILL
TRIPLE CHECK AND I WILL SEND
THAT UP VIA EMAIL TAINING FROM
THANK YOU.
>> IT'S OUR RETREAT ON THE
TWENTY FIRST FROM FOUR TO SEVEN
IT'S A WALKING TOUR AND THE
PUBLIC IS WELCOME TO JOIN US.
WE DO I'M SORRY THERE'S NO
CALENDAR EVENT
ANY OTHER
COMMISSIONER PROPOSED BUSINESS
SEEING AND I WILL ENTERTAIN A
MOTION TO ADJOURN COMMISSIONER
WHETHER BE SECONDED BY COUNCIL
MEMBER DISH IS THERE ANY
DISCUSSION GREAT.
ALL THOSE IN FAVOR SAY I
SUPPOSE WE HEARD